BLUEPRINT.

Perfect Discovery Call

When do
you need
this by?

CUSTOMER ENGAGEMENT .

Provocative:
As an expert, you are
telling a customer
what to do

DD ECISION

Ask how this
impacts their
business
Consultative: Asking
questions to understand
what the customer wants
you to do

ACE, Agenda

SETUP

If customer starts
venting, ask to prioritize SUMMARIZE

Resets
the convo

SS ITUATION

CRITERIA

What happens
if you miss that
date?
You heard what you
wanted to hear; you
are excited and
move on too soon

Share a
customer story

PP AIN
Perform
research
and talk in
context

I I MPACT

EMPATHIZE

H
TC
PI

Max of 2-3
closed
questions

Ask if
you got it
right

CC RITICAL
EE VENT

SS ITUATION

PP AIN

A solution pitch
often results in
disengagement

SS ITUATION

.TIME.

Figure 1: The SPICED Framework applied to a Discovery Call

Questions are fundamental to the selling process — they’re the only way to
diagnose a prospect’s problem. When the right questions are applied in
customer meetings, they become a powerful tool, especially when you act as an
expert and properly structure the conversation. Luckily, meetings have a
repeatable framework you can follow to be effective.

“Prescription before diagnosis is malpractice.”
Prospects don't care about your features and functions as much as they care
about whether you can help them. Don't give the solution to a prospect before
you fully understand their problem.
Here's how professionals run effective meetings.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

1

Preparation
Research the person you’ll be speaking with. If your company has already
had conversations with that person or others at their company, review
those notes to ﬁnd out what they have said they care about.
Check LinkedIn for notable insights (e.g., were they just promoted?
Recent funding round? New product launch?). Make a note of these, so
you can show that you care.

Opening the call: How to transition to
a business conversation
The best start to a meeting accomplishes three things. It sets the
expectations of what you’ll accomplish, the time you have allotted to
meet, and the end goal of the meeting.
Discovery calls need to be conversations, not one-way sales pitches.
The prospect needs to know they have control and feel that their
concerns will be addressed.
Your opening should take about 45 seconds. ACE is a great framework for
getting off to a professional start.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

2

ACE your opening
The goal of this simple framework is to help you spend your brainpower
with active listening, not thinking about what to say at the beginning of a
meeting. Here’s how you open:
● A ppreciate → “I appreciate you taking the time for today’s call.”
● C heck End Time → “We have 30 minutes scheduled to speak today.
Does that still work for you?” (remember to listen to their response
and adjust your call time if necessary)
● E nd Goal → "The end goal of this meeting is to understand your
requirements and see how we can potentially help. If you think it's a
good ﬁt, we'll discuss next steps."
By using the word “appreciate,” you trick your brain into executing a
pattern. This is known as a “chunk.” Chunking will help you perform on
autopilot at the beginning of meetings and help you decide where to take
the conversation next.

Conﬁrm the agenda. Then what?
Conﬁrm the agenda you sent in your calendar invite by quickly telling the
prospect what you plan to cover during the meeting. Then ask:
“What else do you want to get out of today's meeting?”
This open-ended question is deceptively powerful. It will cause your
prospect to pause for an instant, and if they answer, it’s usually their
number one priority or issue they want to solve. Learning their top focus
in the ﬁrst 90 seconds of a call is incredibly valuable.
If there are fewer than ﬁve people on the call, ask everyone what they’re
looking to get out of the meeting. Write down each of their names and
responses, and make sure you address their top priorities before the end
of the call. If there are more than ﬁve people, ask your champion or
stakeholder to answer on behalf of the group. Starting off like this helps
the group realize that this is going to be a two-way conversation.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

3

Diagnose before prescribing: SPICED
This is where the bulk of the meeting time is spent. Use question-based selling
to ﬁgure out what your prospect is actually looking to solve. Ask them
questions to understand their situation ﬁrst. Then move into questions that
help clarify their pain and desired impact.

Situation
Begin with situational questions that show you have done some research, but
also help you qualify the prospect based on basic minimal requirements. These
are closed-ended questions that help set the context.

Pain
When you begin asking pain questions, don’t just ask the generic and overused
“What keeps you up at night?” Ask more thoughtful questions like, “When
speaking to other Directors of Sales, they usually mention that challenges X, Y
and Z are their top priorities to solve. To what extent is [X challenge] important
to you?”
Summarize what you've heard before moving forward. This demonstrates that
you're actively listening and actually care about helping them.

Storytelling
Early in the sales conversations, prospects care more about how their peers
solved a similar challenge than hearing how good a particular solution is.
Share a customer story that relates to their situation and pain — even better if
it involves a similar persona or job title as the prospect you’re speaking with.
The key is to make sure your story includes a relevant use case and a pain that
you’ve just identiﬁed they’re currently facing. When the meeting is over, your
prospects will remember stories much more than facts and features.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

4

Discovery Call – Checklist
BEFORE THE CALL

DIAGNOSE THEIR SITUATION:

❏ Check your technology: Dial in, set up your screen

LISTEN AND LEARN w/ SPICED

share, etc.
❏ Set up your tabs: Close apps, switch off real-time
status updates.
❏ Send out courtesy email: “Whenever you’re ready,
here are the dial-in details ….”

OPEN THE MEETING
❏ Let people introduce themselves: Write down their
names.

❏ Ask SPI questions: Few S , few P build to I..
❏ Check off your “customer centric sales criteria”.
❏ Decision Criteria: Why is that important to you?
What happens if that doesn’t occur?
❏

C ritical E vent: What is driving the urgency?

❏

D ecision Process: What are the steps to get you
there?

❏ Summarize: To conﬁrm… did I get that right?...
anything else?

❏ Introduce yourself: Helps establish control of the
meeting.
❏ Ask for approval to record: Since Jack can’t join the
meeting, do you mind if we record this…
❏ Inquire about their goals: What would you like to
achieve in this call?

CLOSE
❏ Verify “End Goal” from ACE: To your point… we
address that with…
❏ Next steps: No more than 3 actions. Connect the
wagons, set up the next meeting
❏ Summarize: 3-point summary; shorter is better

PERFORM “ACE”
❏

A ppreciate: Appreciate you making time for the call
today

❏

C heck end time: Does ending at 10:30 still work for
you?

❏

E nd Goal: This call typically concludes with you

❏ Questions: Ask if there are questions that arose
from the meeting
❏ End everything: Close the call, stop sharing your
screen
❏ Follow up immediately: Actions: <60mins. Thank
You note: <8 hours

achieving...
❏ Take notes (and let them know): Can you spell that
for me...
❏ Present agenda, then ask: What else would you like
to add?

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

5

Impact
Now you can begin to transition the prospect from emotional to more rational
decision making. Attempt to quantify the value of your solution. Ask the prospect
questions that describe the impact a solution like yours could have on the company.
Discussing impact during the discovery call helps you close deals. The ROI of your
solution is uncovered through value-based, open-ended questions.

Connecting the wagons
At this point, you need to share how speciﬁc parts of your solution address each of the
pain points that your prospect wants to solve. Show how Feature X will generate more
ROI, or how Dashboard A will give them the visibility they need to solve their top
priority.
As you wrap up, ask if all their concerns were addressed and if their end goal was
achieved. Then connect the wagons by scheduling the next meeting. Consider asking,
“Who else on your team would beneﬁt from joining our next meeting?

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

6

Connecting the wagons (continued)

1

3

4

5

Connect the WAGONS

MEETING (N)

MEETING (N+1)

2

6
Shorten the sales cycle

STEP

DESCRIPTION

PREPARATION

Open

Exchange pleasantries. Ask for approval to record and take notes.

Review LinkedIn proﬁles to research

Distinguish the different voices and who they belong to. Begin in a

who you are speaking with.

friendly tone that adds energy to the call. Start a conversation to get the
group talking.
1. ACE

Orchestrate the call, verify time, set the end goal, and engage:

Prepare a one-sentence “end goal” from

A Appreciate: Appreciate you taking the time.

the prospect’s perspective, stating what

C Check Time: Are we still good for 30 minutes?

they want to achieve on this call.

E Verify End Goal: The end goal of this call is to...
Ask: Does that sound right?
2. Agenda

● Conﬁrm the agenda: I prepared an agenda for us today...

● Send calendar invite

● Attendees: What else would you like to get out of this call?

● Include executive brief

● Involve everyone: How about you, Danny?

● Multiple attendees?

● Ask: What is most important to you?

● Reconﬁrm meeting 24hrs/15 min
before

3. Wagon

Take control of the conversation: In the interest of time...

● Review notes

Reorient them on the agenda and time: We have 5 minutes left to set up

● Keep track of time

the next steps… or can we extend by 10 minutes?
Look back: Did we address your questions?

Prepare what to ask for! This should be

Follow up on the ACE: At the beginning of the call, we said…

aligned with ACE.

Close: Are you ready to move forward with…
4. Connect

Connect the wagons: Let’s schedule the demo call. Have you been on a

Prepare the question

demo previously?
5. Set Goal

Set the end goal: What’s the outcome you hope to get out of the demo?

Prepare the end goal

6. Secure

Secure attendance:

Review organizational proﬁle

● Ask: Who else do you think can beneﬁt from… ?
● Suggest: Should your CMO Lynn be involved… ?
● Story: Others I’ve worked with have invited the…

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

7

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FROM

Videos available on
the WbD YouTube Channel

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

Additional open source
templates can be accessed at
www.thescienceofrevenue.com

8

