RESEARCH BRIEF

FACTS AND FEATURES:
THE RISE OF AI SDRs
By Dominique Levin, CEO Emeritus of Winning by Design

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

Facts and Features: The Rise of AI SDRs
By Dominique Levin, CEO Emeritus of Winning by Design
Research conducted Q4 2024

Research Abstract
This document provides an overview of the rise of AI SDRs, speciﬁcally inbound SDRs.
It starts with a CEO Take: if you are a CEO of a B2B company, what should you know
about AI SDRs? Then it will do the same for the GTM practitioners tasked with
researching and implementing AI SDR technology. The report that follows is focused on
practical considerations for implementing AI SDRs into your Go-To-Market (GTM)
strategy. As the technology is still rapidly evolving, it is essential to understand the
nuances, capabilities, and limitations of AI-driven solutions. The full report includes a
vendor comparison of current relevant features as well as a Request for Proposal (RFP)
template, both of which are available to Advisory Access subscribers.

CEO Take
AI Agent technology is quickly maturing to the point that every B2B company must have
a pilot running. Early data indicates that AI SDRs outperform and replace humans when
it comes to the inbound lead qualiﬁcation use case (24x7 availability, instant and reliable
response, etc.) and that AI SDRs can signiﬁcantly increase the productivity of human
outbound SDRs, especially when it comes to performing and integrating research. Using
AI SDR technology will create more pipeline at a much lower cost, and if you ignore the
technology competitors may quickly overtake you.
Most companies ﬁnd that for an inbound AI SDR project, marketing is the most suitable
to run the pilot as the technology must be integrated into the website. However, to ensure
success, marketing must collaborate with sales and GTM operations and strategy, so set
up a cross-functional task team to ensure the success of your project.

Dec 1, 2024

1

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

Practitioners Take
AI agents are rapidly improving and can be used for speciﬁc use cases to drive growth
and overcome GTM bottlenecks, especially in areas where humans have limited skills. It
is critical to see beyond the 'demo effect', a situation where the AI performs exceptionally
well in a controlled environment but struggles in real-world scenarios, and understand
that AI is a rapidly evolving landscape in which most vendors blur the lines between
vision and features.
Here are ﬁve questions you should be asking:
1.What GTM metric is lagging?
2.What do you wish humans could be better at?
3.What features matter most?
4.

How to train and test your AI SDR?

5.Which vendors should I consider?

Question 1: What GTM metric is lagging?
Consider what GTM metric you most want to improve, where you are lagging versus the
industry, or your historical average in any particular metric: a conversion rate, sales cycle
time, or average deal size in a particular segment. Can you envision an experiment that
goes beyond the capabilities of humans to enhance this metric, such as by conducting
more research, memorizing more use cases or features, and responding more quickly? AI
has the potential to signiﬁcantly improve these metrics, offering a promising outlook for
your business.

Use AI to improve a ‘sticky’ GTM metric.
Perform a full Bowtie Go-To-Market Diagnostic to identify your biggest bottlenecks to
growth and pick one of those areas. For example, convert more inbound requests into
meetings, convert more webinar attendees into discovery calls, or turn more discovery
calls into proposals.

Dec 1, 2024

2

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

ACQUISITION

RETENTION AND EXPANSION

Qualiﬁcation

Awareness

Education

ADR

SDR

Selection

Sales

Mutual
Commit

SE

Onboarding

Adoption

Usage

PM

CSM/AM

AM

Figure 1. The application of AI can be used in various parts of the customer journey.

Question 2: What do you wish humans could be better at?
Find skills that could move a sticky GTM metric but are hard for humans. This way, you
can accelerate growth and reduce costs with your AI implementation. Superhuman skills
highlighted:
●

Inﬁnite availability and capacity, including the ability to respond to every inbound
within seconds, follow-up with every single event attendee before/during/after
the event, at any time of the day or week

●

Boundless product and company knowledge, knowledge about every single
product feature, the ability to instantly pull up relevant slides, illustrations, or parts
of a demo—even during the ﬁrst conversation—without deferring to a ‘sales
engineer’ or ‘product specialist’ (no prospect wants more calls)

●

Know all other customer deployments and the problems they solved. While
humans have a limited library of case studies at their ﬁngertips, an AI can
instantly access all prior customer interactions and call recordings in your CRM
and turn this data into relevant customer story snippets on the ﬂy.

●

Instant ability to perform deep research on every single inbound or outbound
prospect or customer from an inﬁnite number of ﬁrst and third-party data
sources to make the conversation more relevant

Dec 1, 2024

3

The Rise of AI SDRs

●

Winning by Design Proprietary

Remember everything said before; the customers never have to repeat
themselves to continue the conversation.

●

Ability to distinguish between an inﬁnite number of personas. Maybe the
segments that your solution targets include Financial Services and Healthcare,
within each vertical: mid-market companies and enterprises, and for each
company: C-level, Director, and End User. It creates 2 x 3 x 3 = 18 personas, each
with their pain points. For human sellers, we would dumb this down to a few
personas, but an AI agent can master different starter questions and vocabulary
for each of the 18 permutations.

Here are some examples of metrics and how ‘superhuman’ AI skills could improve each:

Metric to improve

Superhuman skills AI can use

Convert more inbound requests into
meetings.

Superhumans respond to every inbound request
within seconds and perform extensive research before
doing so, making each response more relevant. Also,
they never forget to follow up with thoughtful nudges
if a meeting doesn’t initially get scheduled.

Convert more webinar attendees into
discovery calls.

When you invite people to an event or follow up with
an email after the event, offer a live conversation with
the AI then and there to learn more about the prospect
and answer their questions.

Convert more discovery calls into
proposals.

Because AI can have inﬁnite product knowledge, even
during the ﬁrst conversation, it can answer (more)
product questions and use-case questions (e.g.,
customer stories), leading to more prospect
conversions.

Table 1. Examples of GTM metrics to improve and how AI could help.

Dec 1, 2024

4

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

Question 3: What features matter most?
How well your AI Agent will perform will depend on whether it can communicate
synchronously and asynchronously, how well it can understand your customers (not just
your product), and whether it can achieve goals beyond simply answering questions.
Additional hygiene features will have to do with what could possibly go wrong (See next
section):

Synchronicity of the conversation.
Can the AI agent handle synchronous (text/voice/video chat) and asynchronous
conversations? Needless to say, synchronous capabilities are more complicated than
asynchronous ones. Many use cases will require or beneﬁt from both (See Figure 2.)

Nurture Unresponsive Inbound

Sync
Chat or Call

Async
Email or Message

Offer (Warm) Outbound Real Time/Live Chat

Figure 2. Synchronous and asynchronous capabilities work together in most use cases.

First and third-party signals
How well can the AI agent research and understand your customers, not just your
products? Does the agent integrate with your CRM (ﬁrst-party data) out of the box? If so,
what ﬁelds can it read, and which ﬁelds does it use in customer conversations?

Dec 1, 2024

5

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

“Most vendors highlight CRM integration, but few
incorporate the insights into the conversation.”
Third-party signals can provide additional business context. Think about the ability to
detect news, hires, technographic, third-party reviews, and all the other signals that may
inﬂuence what thoughtful question you might open a conversation with. Most solutions
do not yet perform deep research or tailor the conversation based on research.

Seconds

Inbound
Request

Real-Time
Research

Relevant
Response

1st Party
CRM past engagement
Other contacts of
account
Marketing engagement
Product usage
3rd Party
Company & lead data
Intent data
3rd Party reviews
Social signals
News signals
Tech stack used
Org trends & hiring
Partner/employee
relations

Figure 3. Researching a prospect in real-time and being more relevant increases the customer experience.

Dec 1, 2024

6

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

Goals of the AI interaction
Is the agent deterministic, not just generative? What goals can the AI achieve?
Can the AI achieve goals beyond simply answering questions—such as booking
meetings, inviting to events, diagnosing pain and impact, recommending to the buyer
how to get internal alignment for a decision, and providing proposals and pricing? Most
vendors are still very focused on handing off to a human as quickly as possible. That’s
not much better than form automation.

Question 4: How to train and test your AI SDR?
You will need to teach your AI just like a human, but much more precisely. Therefore,
standing up an AI SDR requires a signiﬁcant product marketing effort. You will need to
teach your AI not only about your company and product but also (and especially) about
your Ideal Customer Proﬁle, personas, and pain points (by persona).

Training your AI solutions
Some vendors turn away clients who aren’t extremely clear about their ICP and personas,
which shows how important this step is to success.
1.

Train AI on your company and
product.
Most AI vendors allow you to

Customer Data & Signals
Who & When
1st Party Data

3rd Party Data

point the AI to your website,
internal knowledge base, and

Context

content repositories to
accomplish this step, and this
information is often readily

Messaging & Process Design
What & How

available. You need to ensure
that your website’s

Segment/Persona

GTM Motions

information is up-to-date and
accurate.

Dec 1, 2024

Figure 4. Providing your AI brain with the business context to
succeed is critical.

7

The Rise of AI SDRs

2.

Winning by Design Proprietary

Documenting your Ideal Customer Personas
For each of the permutations of your Ideal Customer Persona, lay out the likely
situation, pain, impact, and critical events by persona and provide starter
questions for the AI. It is a signiﬁcant product marketing upfront investment, but
it will improve the results of your AI project. It is similar to the persona cards
and discovery questions many enablement teams provide for their sellers.

3.

Providing a blueprint for the conversation
Humans expect to receive value from each vendor interaction, but the AI
conversation should avoid feeling like an interrogation. To train the AI, provide it
with blueprints or visual guides that represent the ﬂow of a strong human
interaction, just as we would do with newly minted SDRs or AEs.

Value to
buyer

Value to
seller

Provide some
market insight

Identify the
customer

Suggest
next steps

Provide relevant
use case stories

Diagnose
customer pain

Qualify the
customer

Figure 5. Provide your AI with a picture or blueprint of a good conversation.

4.

Establishing your GTM motion by persona
The next best action will depend on the customer segment and the information
collected during the interaction between the customer and AI. You may operate
in different customer segments and have deﬁned a different GTM motion based
on the customer’s size and other factors, such as the prospect’s intent (highversus low-intent customers).

Dec 1, 2024

8

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

Testing your AI Agent
Building a vertical AI agent that’s 80% customer-ready is relatively easy. Training and
testing an AI agent to be 100% customer-ready is hard. Prematurely launching an AI
agent can risk damaging customer trust or your business reputation, and result in
backlash from customers facing hallucinations and toxicity. It is best practice to keep
the Human In The Loop (HITL) during the ﬁrst 1-3 months. Testing and monitoring
HITL can take different forms:
1.

Run the solution in co-pilot mode before switching to auto-pilot; not all vendors
offer this.

2.

Keep a Human In The Loop by having an AI and human participate together on
the same call or chat, comparable to four-legged sales calls during a new rep’s
training period. Very few vendors offer this.

3.

Ongoing quality assurance: Ideally, dashboards and alerts should be available
to point you to suspect conversations, since it’s unrealistic to manually review
every AI interaction.

4.

Use red teaming to test your AI: Red teaming involves trying to ‘break’ the AI
and get it to give toxic or wrong answers. It is used extensively in cybersecurity
and is slowly emerging to test AI agents for effectiveness, accuracy,
fairness/bias, and security.

Dec 1, 2024

9

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

Human-in-the-loop Explained
HITL emphasizes the integration of human oversight in AI-driven processes,
particularly when the potential consequences of failure are high. While AI can operate
autonomously in low-risk scenarios, human judgment is crucial for tasks with
signiﬁcant stakes. The HITL Curve (see Figure 6) balances AI's precision with human
intervention, ensuring that higher-risk, more complex tasks receive the necessary
oversight while low-complexity tasks can be handled autonomously.

Design Bridges
1:1 (Complex)

Architect
SE

The Human-InThe-Loop curve

Build Roads
(Skill Level)

Human-oversight-ratio

Full oversight, one
human oversees
one AI process.

AE
AM
CSM

Fix potholes

Enablement
SDR

1:100 (Simple)
Minimal oversight,
many AIs managed
by one human.

Negligible
($2/hr)

Catastrophic
Consequence of Failure

($200/hour)

(Cost per hour)
Figure 6. The Human-in-the-Loop Curve shows the relationship between AI's capability to
manage low-complexity tasks with minimal oversight (1:100) and the need for full human
oversight (1:1) in high-risk, complex tasks.

Dec 1, 2024

10

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

Question 5: What vendors should I consider?
As companies continue to explore AI's potential in sales and customer engagement, several
vendors have emerged with innovative solutions to address key use cases. We’ve gathered
insights from diverse companies at the forefront of AI-powered sales agents, each offering
unique capabilities in both inbound and outbound communication. Below, we highlight the
vendors we spoke to, what sets them apart, and the strengths of their offerings, from
asynchronous and synchronous agents to advanced personalization and multi-channel support.
●

1Mind.com, started by the founder/CEO of 6Sense, offers agents capable of sync and
async communication. They have a live demo on their website. What we like: AI can
participate in live video calls and remember what was said in previous conversations.

●

11x.ai focuses on agents for both outbound and inbound sales. It is funded by
Benchmark and a12z. Sign up for a live demo on the website. What we like: It has both
asynchronous and synchronous capabilities, albeit not yet integrated.

●

AISDR.com - focus on outbound prospecting agents via email and LinkedIn,
Y Combinator startup, sign-up for a live demo on the website. What we like: We can work
with multiple CTAs within one campaign and have multiple campaigns in parallel.

●

Algomo.com focuses on the inbound/web-chat agent use case, starting with real-time
website personalization. What we like: You can (self-service) launch a live demo as if the
agent is already live on your website.

●

Qualiﬁed.com focuses on inbound chatbots, and $163m was raised from
Salesforce.com, Redpoint, Norwest, Tiger, and Sapphire. You can try the demo live on
their website. What we like: extensive experience (market leader) in the inbound chat
space.

●

Relevance.ai is an agent builder platform funded by Insight Partners. Its outbound agent
is free and available on its website. What we like: Super ﬂexible no-code platform, its
following of developers building agents, and impressive reasoning and research
capabilities demo.

●

Rep.ai focuses on inbound chat agents, evolved from ServiceBell chatbots, and has a
live demo on its website. What we like: It is one of the few companies with a live video
avatar on its website.

Dec 1, 2024

11

The Rise of AI SDRs

●

Winning by Design Proprietary

Reply.io evolved from a sales engagement platform to an AI SDR that can combine
inbound and outbound communication and automate email, LinkedIn, and SMS.
What we like: it has many different channels for AI agents to communicate.

●

SalesAPE.ai focuses on inbound via email, WhatsApp, SMS, or web chat. A live
email demo is available on their website. What we like: their focus on the inbound
use case.

●

Salesforce.com focuses on outbound SDR agents and sales coach agents.
General availability has been pushed back to December 4, 2024. What we like: In
addition to SDR agents, they also have a cool sales coaching agent for humans.

●

Salesforge.ai focuses on outbound prospecting co-pilot or autopilot, a 50-person
startup out of Estonia, no pilot available, minimum commitment is 3 months.

●

SalesLoft/Drift: A leading sales engagement platform with cool
rhythm/prioritization algorithms, bought a leading web chatbot. What we like: AI
features are nascent, but the promise lies in the integration with Salesloft and Drift.

●

Salespeak.ai focuses on inbound agents who can do more than qualify leads.
Their website offers a live demo. What we like: Salespeak.ai is focused on
re-inventing and improving the entire buyer journey with AI.

●

Regie.ai focuses on outbound sequence writing agents, Khosla Ventures, Scale
Venture Partners, Foundation Capital, and South Park Commons. What we like: A
free version available to start

Vendor Capabilities and Market Research Guidelines
1.

The list of vendors and each vendor’s capabilities are evolving rapidly, making it
essential to conduct thorough research.

2.

The market is still in its early stages, so this note is not intended to be written in a way to
favor any particular vendor.

3.

A vendor must have provided a comprehensive demo of their capabilities to be included
in this review. We did not engage with customers or assess production environments.

Want to make this happen?
Book Time with an Advisor
Dec 1, 2024

12

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
The following supplementary materials are available in the full version
of this report, available to subscribers in the reference library. For more
information on subscribing, see winningbydesign.com/access-pass.

01 Vendor Comparison
02 RFP Template
03 Your Guide to Running
Impact Sprints
04 SPICED Across the
Customer Journey

Dec 1, 2024

13

The Rise of AI SDRs

Winning by Design Proprietary

READ OUR OTHER AI AGENT RESEARCH REPORTS

AI AGENTS: RESEARCH ACROSS THE BOWTIE

Like what you read?
Send to a Colleague

Dec 1, 2024

14

