BLUEPRINT.

Kickoff Call

Providing
Value and
Impact

. CUSTOMER ENGAGEMENT .

I MPACT

Document
Assign
action items next steps

JOINT IMPACT
PLAN

TEACHING
MOMENTS

● Add immediate actions to action plan
● Assign tasks and next steps to
appropriate stakeholders
● Assign due dates

Summarize the situation
and pain reviewed during
the sales conversations
P AIN

ONBOARDING
REVIEW

S ITUATION

CONNECT THE
WAGONS

Provide a “map”
with a visual of the
onboarding stages
ACE,
Agenda
Internal External

NEXT STEPS

INTRODUCTIONS
Follow up immediately to
maintain momentum. Send the
kickoff call deck with a
completed project plan of each
person’s tasks and actions.

SETUP

PREP

POST CALL
ACTION

TIME .

Introduction
The kickoff call is a pivotal moment in the customer journey because it sets the
tone for the post-sales stages of customer engagement. It’s an opportunity for
Customer Success professionals to set expectations, understand change
management requirements, align with all key stakeholders, and start building a
business relationship with your new customers.
This blueprint is a step-by-step guide to help you use the kickoff call to create
an immediate impact for your customer. It covers the following:
1) How to prepare for a kickoff call
2) What to include in a kickoff call deck
3) Conducting kickoff calls effectively
4) Post-kickoff call actions

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

1

Preparing for the Kickoff Call
Internal Prep
● Review documented information and notes from Sales
● Conduct an internal kickoff with your team
● Prepare an agenda and kickoff call deck that will foster
collaboration
● Begin building a project plan

External Prep
● Respond to introductions from Sales as soon as possible (within
one business day)
● Schedule the kickoff call with the customer and send an invite
immediately upon conﬁrming a time:
○ Ensure all key stakeholders are invited to the call
○ Conﬁrm that all key stakeholders will be attending the call
○ If they aren’t attending, follow up with them directly and
encourage them to attend
○ Include the agenda in the invite

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

TIP: The Customer Success
rep should be accountable
for scheduling the kickoff
call. It establishes credibility
with the customer, allows
Sales to focus on sales, and
allows Customer Success to
focus on the post-sales
customer journey right from
the start.
TIP: Use a Kickoff Call Deck as
a way to facilitate the
conversation. Do not make it
the focus of the call or read
from a series of slides. Use it as
a medium to share information
and teach. Create a resource
that your customers will want
to refer back to.

2

Orchestrating the Kickoff Call
ACE & Agenda
Orchestrate the call, verify time, set the end goal, and engage:
A Appreciate: Appreciate you taking the time
C Check time: Ask each person attending, Are we still good for 30
minutes?
E Verify the End goal: Typically at the end of this call, we agree on a
plan to jointly achieve Business Impact...
Ask: Do you have anything else to add?
● Conﬁrm the agenda
● Ask attendees: What else would you like to get out of this call?
● Involve everyone: How about you, Danny?

Introductions
The introduction is a great opportunity for you to learn more about
your customer and each stakeholder. During the introductions, ask
every attendee to introduce themselves and explain their role in the
company and this project/onboarding. You’ll often gain valuable
insight into each person’s role and mindset for this project.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

TIP: To make the most of the
introductions, introduce
yourself, and then
orchestrate the introductions
of the rest of the group:
choose a speciﬁc person to
introduce themselves, and
then ask that person to
choose the next person who
should speak up to introduce
themselves, and so on. This
will eliminate awkward
silences or people speaking
over each other.

3

Verify & Deepen SPICED
Summarize what you learned during the internal Sales < > Customer
Success handoff using the SPICED framework…
Verify: Did I get that right?
Deepen: Is there anything else you would like to achieve?
Ask: How do you deﬁne success? (try to quantify the desired impact)

“Did I understand correctly that you…”
S

Situation 1

… currently have 250 employees

S

Situation 2

… and recently acquired a company with 50 employees

P

Pain

… and that you worry about high voluntary employee turnover

I

Impact

… and you’d like to reduce voluntary employee turnover by 30%

CE

Critical Event

… before the next performance review cycle in November

D

Decision (criteria)

… and that it’s important to you that we have professional services

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

4

Teaching Your Customer and Providing Value
Look for opportunities to teach your customers about additional
value that your solution can provide with the package and features
they’ve already purchased (for example, if they purchased your
solution to increase revenue but there are also ways they can
leverage your solution to save time, highlight this). This helps to
establish you as a trusted advisor who adds value and knowledge.
Do not confuse this with teaching your customers about new
features or products that require an upsell. The kickoff call is too
early to start positioning additional purchases. Ensure you are
teaching valuable insights that are within the scope of their current
purchase and/or based on industry knowledge and best practices.

Onboarding Overview
It’s critical to set customers up for success from day one. Even if this
is your 100th time going through the onboarding process, it’s your
customer’s ﬁrst.
Reduce confusion by providing your customers with an onboarding
map. Provide an overview of the steps and stages, clear timelines,
and what they should expect. Start with an easy-to-follow, high-level
explanation, and then dive into details as needed afterward.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

5

Joint Impact Plan
Align on an onboarding plan, action items, and next steps to create a
smooth customer experience. This will also ensure you get the
customer to First Value within their desired timeframe.
Introduce your customer to a joint onboarding and impact plan. This
plan should:
1) Keep all stakeholders aligned on next steps.
2) Ensure all stakeholders are held accountable for their action items.
3) Deliver impact to the customer by getting them to ﬁrst and full
value as quickly and effectively as possible.

Next Steps
● Review any immediate action items that need to be completed and
add them to the impact plan.
● Assign action items/tasks and next steps to speciﬁc stakeholders.
● Assign due dates.

Connect the Wagons
Agree on a cadence of progress meetings to ensure that the joint
impact realization plan is followed. Schedule out a series of Impact
Review meetings with the customer’s management based on your
onboarding timeline for achieving impact.

Post-Kickoff Call Actions
Don’t lose momentum or the customer's motivation. Follow up
immediately after the call with a recap, a copy of the kickoff call deck,
and the completed project plan with individuals responsible for each
task and action item.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

TIP: Block 15 minutes on
your calendar following
kickoff calls so you can send
the recap and a copy of the
deck, while the conversation
and information is still fresh
in your mind.

6

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FROM

Videos available on
the WbD YouTube Channel

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

Additional open source
templates can be accessed at
www.thescienceofrevenue.com

7

