BLUEPRINT.

How to Conduct
High Impact Coaching
An amateur practices until they
get it right. A professional
practices until they can’t get it
wrong.”
UNKNOWN

Mastery Takes Time, Effort, and Multiple Failures
Managers often wish they had more time to dedicate to coaching.
“High Impact Coaching'' is a way to maximize your time together as a
team in order to focus on skills development in a shorter time frame.
The following are key to successfully implementing high impact
coaching at your organization:
● Transition early learnings by reps into consistent behavior
with customers
● Create a culture of coaching for continual improvement
and accountability
● Build the coaching muscle so that what seems hard now
will become easier and more repeatable later

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

1

Timeline of a Single Coaching Session*

Wrap up & discuss next steps

Recap/Review of the
previous week’s learnings

Roleplay to
reinforce learnings
Review call #1

Review call #2
* Coaching sessions should
typically last 60 minutes

Roleplay to reinforce learnings

Call Reviews with Peers
Reviewing calls in front of the group taps into several positive coaching
techniques. Reps should take pride when you show off how they’ve been
successful in implementing the process in a real call. If you need to coach
someone up, call recordings are an objective way for them to see the gaps
in how they’re executing, without being confrontational.

The key is making it fair, transparent,
and actionable.
Private 1:1 call reviews between the coach and rep should be reserved for
egregious errors that are not appropriate for the rest of the team to hear
(e.g., vulgar language, lying, or other inappropriate behavior). Everyone
should have a turn and know when their call will be reviewed ahead of time.
High impact coaching works so well because it taps into every element of
the 10-20-70 learning model. At the beginning of the session, you refresh on
the process (10% formal learning), then you observe your peers
implementing the process (20%), and the ﬁnal 70% is spent performing the
process on a real customer call or in a roleplaying exercise.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

2

High Impact Coaching Steps
STEP 1.1
Listen to the calls prior to the coaching session
Identify coaching points you can use to engage the group in a
discussion and target particular skill sets. Note: Timestamp the call
ahead of time to save time ﬁnding the teaching moment. Best
practice is to have your team submit their recordings with their own
timestamps.
STEP 1.2
Engage the group
The session will include discussion, comments, feedback, and
learnings from the team. Use the coaching points you identiﬁed
earlier to direct the conversation toward the session’s learning
objective. When you’re listening to the call, ask everyone to take
notes as if they are the rep on the call. Let them know you will call
on someone after the call to summarize.
STEP 1.3
Use coaching techniques to highlight learning objectives

Process,
then Execution

Pause

Practice

Ask the team which principles were used on the call. For example, which
questions were open-ended and which were close-ended? What unique words
can we mirror? Was there anything unusual about the customer’s tone?

After the coaching opportunity, pause to ask the team coaching questions like
“What do you expect the rep to do next?”

Use a RingRing exercise in front of the group or perform mini-breakouts where
everyone splits into groups of two or three.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

3

STEP 1.4
Share the focus among the group’s calls
Everyone needs to be able to diagnose where there’s an issue and
prescribe a solution in a group environment. In a one-hour small
group session, there should be two or three calls that are reviewed
along the same theme.
STEP 1.5
Engage the group
At the end of the session, provide clear action items for everyone.
We are our own harshest critics — leverage that with a follow-up
exercise. Have everyone submit a self-reviewed call with timestamps
that highlight improvement or mastery of the key learnings of the
day, and set up the topic for the next call review session.

Conclusion
High Impact Coaching often feels daunting for the person sharing
their call, but with the right prep and organization up front, your
team will be asking you to review their calls in front of the group.

Best Practices

DO

Keep it positive. This is constructive

DO NOT

coaching — heavy focus on “constructive.”
DO

feedback like “You didn’t
sound conﬁdent.”

Limit feedback per person to one or two
items; any more and the receiver will feel

DO NOT

overloaded.
DO

storytelling to show how others
have been successful.

vulnerable in front of your team.
Offer valuable insights into the call.

DO

Ensure that everyone is taking notes.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

Refer to how well you’ve done it.
Provide examples and use

Recognize that it isn’t easy being

DO

Provide broad, non-actionable

DO NOT

Take advantage of people’s
vulnerability.

4

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FROM

Videos available on
the WbD YouTube Channel

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

Additional open source
templates can be accessed at
www.thescienceofrevenue.com

5

