Growth Trends in
an Economic
Downturn
Winning by Design conducted a study to understand the impact of an
economic downturn on software-as-a-service (SaaS) businesses. We
looked at various go-to-market factors, and measured key performance
metrics such as sales cycle, deal size, lead conversion, and growth rate.

Roelof Hengst and Jacco J. van der Kooij
Winning by Design
Updated: June 2022

of 7

Summary Points
An increasing share of SaaS companies were able to achieve or maintain hyper-growth during the
economic downturn. This was the result of an increased focus on customer expansion, as well as
closing new deals at a higher price.
The recommendations to sustain growth during an economic downturn are:
a.

Focus on expansion of existing clients.
Action: Establish a playbook for customer expansion, train your CS team on sales skills, and
train managers on coaching their CS team.

b.

Customer Success teams should inform clients of the impact achieved every month.
Action: Hold a workshop with your CS team to identify the impact that your SaaS service
offers, and to establish a cadence to keep the customer informed.

c.

Increase revenue from logo acquisition by increasing the price where appropriate. This should
be combined with helping the sales team identify prospective customers early on, based on the
need for Impact and establishing a Critical Event.
Action: Hold a workshop with the Marketing and Sales teams to identify the impact your SaaS
service offers; work with your Revenue executive team to identify areas for potential price
increases.

Introduction

toward customer retention and expansion.

The ﬁndings in this report cover research
conducted by Winning by Design (WbD) over the
period from March 2020 to July 2021.

Further analysis shows that growth originated
from three speciﬁc causes:
1.

of a price increase.

Respondents observed that during this period, it
was harder to generate new leads and win new
deals. As a result, companies shifted focus to
existing customer expansion and higher deal
values for new business.

Larger deal sizes, in some cases the result

2.

Fewer but higher quality leads driven by
better market awareness.

3.

Higher conversion rates based on
improved sales skills and execution.

The impact of this shift is that a growing number
of SaaS companies achieved growth during the
economic downturn.

It is because of this that Winning by Design
recommends increasing the focus on customer
retention and expansion during an economic

This was the result of focusing the executive

downturn.

team’s attention and the company’s resources

Growth During an Economic Downturn

1 of 7

This increase in focus requires companies to

In comparison, reverting to a focus on customer

understand what impact a product delivers to its

acquisition, lead volume, and discounting creates

customers, and then rally its resources around it.

a negative spiral that has proven to lower
customer retention and expansion rates. This in

With a laser focus on impact, it becomes far

turn leads growth rates to come down as more

easier to retain and expand existing customer

new business is required to ﬁll revenue gaps

relationships, and to reduce the cost of sales (or

created by higher churn, and the cost of sales

rather, the cost of growth).

goes up as more effort is needed to maintain the
growth trajectory.

In addition, strong customer relationships deliver
positive brand perception and customer
advocacy, which have a signiﬁcant impact on
demand volume and new business win rates.

How we Conducted the Survey
We are thankful to the dozens of respondents

represented included The Netherlands, Belgium,

willing to share their stories and data via

Germany, and the UK.

individual video interviews. Their stories allowed

The WbD Data Model (also known as “The

us to capture both the data and the context

Bowtie”) was used as a foundational construct for

behind the numbers.

respondent interviews and data gathering. We
then applied the model to perform analysis and

Respondents were primarily sales leaders (VP of

comparisons of current customer results with

Sales) and company Founders from companies

past customer data.

based in Europe with annual revenue between
€10 million and €25 million. Countries

Revenue Stages

Awareness

Education

CR 1

CR 2

Selection

Commit Onboard

Achieve
Impact

Growth

CR 5

CR 6

CR 7

Conversion Rates
CR 3

CR 4

Figure 1. The Data Model (“The Bowtie”) is used to examine the entire Customer Journey.

Growth During an Economic Downturn

2 of 7

Research Findings: Improvements and Challenges
Respondents experienced higher revenue growth, larger deal sizes, and shorter deal cycles, but were
challenged by market awareness and onboarding existing customers.

4. Most challenging stages.

39%
Awareness

Education

CR 1

CR 2

Selection

CR 3

5. Most improved stage
22%

17%

Commit

Onboard

Achieve
Impact

Growth

CR 5

CR 6

CR 7

CR 4

43%

2. Average deal size increase
10-25%
3. 25%-100% reduction of
sales cycle

1. Revenue Increase 50%.

Figure 2. Visual summary of research ﬁndings across the Bowtie.

Finding 1 50% Growth Rate
●

Revenue growth: The majority of

●

Deal size: Companies typically increased

respondents are in hyper-growth mode,

average deal size by 10 to 25%. More than

with revenue increases of more than 50% in

half of respondents have a deal size between

the last 15 months during the economic

$10,000 and $100,000.

downturn.
●

Finding 2 Deal Size Increased

●

Price increase: Against expectations, most

Hiring growth: 44% of respondents expect

of the companies had increased their price

to expand their sales teams by more than

to compensate for the lower volume of

50% in the next 12 months.

deals.

Observation: In volatile conditions or downturns,

Observation: During an economic downturn,

it is common for SaaS companies to outperform

companies focus more on existing customers out of

the overall market in terms of revenue growth and

necessity. Because existing customers want help to

hiring demand, as we saw in 2008.

achieve impact from your product, a common
result is an improved product. When companies
deliver more impact with a better product, both
new and existing customers are willing to pay a
higher price.

Growth During an Economic Downturn

3 of 7

Finding 3 Shorter Sales Cycles
●

Faster decisions: Companies in the study saw
their sales cycles shorten or stay the same;
very few companies saw cycle times get

Finding 4 New Challenges
A series of challenges were experienced:
●

measure conversion rates. Respondents said

longer. Sales cycles for respondents were

in the last 15 months, their biggest

typically 90 days or longer.
●

challenges were creating awareness (39%),

Signiﬁcant time reductions: 70% of

winning deals (22%), and onboarding new

respondents encountered a reduction of the

customers (17%).

sales cycles beyond 26%.
●

Awareness: 91% of respondents said they

●

Sales stage improvement: Respondents said

Further reduction potential: Respondents

the expansion sales stage improved the most

expect that optimizing sales team skills and

by far (43%) (see Figure 1 for deﬁnition of

deﬁning a better target account approach

expansion stage).

will be vital to shortening sales cycles even
further.

●

Sales stage challenges: Respondents said
that over the next 12 months, they will apply

Observation: The key driver behind a commitment

the most effort and resources to the

(and therefore a shorter sales cycle) is to identify a

awareness and education stages.

Critical Event that requires a customer to make a
decision. A Critical Event is the need to achieve a
desired impact by a speciﬁc time or risk

Observation: With the shift to focus on delivering
customer impact, respondents saw their funnels
naturally reset to a more productive level. Companies

consequences. In 2020, the sense of urgency was

that experience this are achieving a natural growth

heightened by market challenges, creating a need

state. For SaaS companies, this creates hyper-growth

for immediate impact and faster decisions.

because happy customers who achieve desired impact
will naturally want to buy more.

Research Findings: Perspective on Strategy Risks
A disproportionate improvement in revenue can only come from the compound growth of existing
customers. Reverting to pre-COVID tactics and shifting focus and resources away from helping
customers achieve impact will slow down growth.

Finding 5 Risks of Traditional
Volume-Focused Growth
Tactics

any account, not just the right ones.

Study ﬁndings show that companies are planning

causes of this are explained in a storyboard found

The consequence of winning the wrong deals is
increased churn, which consumes valuable
resources and slows down growth (note: root

a return to pre-COVID growth tactics with

in the Annex).

increased focus on deal volume. Although deal

WbD recommends that companies proceed with

volume does impact growth and should be part of

caution when considering the return to a more

go-to-market strategies, it is winning the right

traditional growth strategy with tactics focused

accounts that delivers hyper growth. Often, deal

primarily on lead volume and new customer

volume means winning

acquisition.

Growth During an Economic Downturn

4 of 7

Finding 6 Advantages of
Maintaining a Focus on
Customer Impact
Study respondents said circumstances in 2020
caused a shift to focus on existing customers. The
positive result they delivered was a stronger
foundation for recurring revenue based on two
factors:
1.

Focus on helping existing customers achieve
a positive impact

2.

Finding 7 Performance Metrics
The top 40 most successful SaaS companies have
two metrics in common: it takes them on average
21 months to recoup CAC, and their LTV to CAC
ratio is 3:1 or better, meaning the long-term value
of a customer is at least three times the cost of
winning them.
That means that to run a successful and
sustainable SaaS operation, companies must hold
on to a customer’s business for an average of 63
months, or 5¼ years. Most companies cannot

Ability to realize higher prices based on

expect customer relationships to last this long, so

positive customer impact

they need to look for ways to reduce CAC and

Our research found evidence of this based on

increase LTV faster.

revenue growth attainment and improvement of

Paying attention to performance metric

conversion metrics across pre- and post-sale

improvements is the best way to optimize the

stages from March 2020 to June 2021.

recurring revenue engine for hyper-growth.

Recommendations
Recommended actions to help companies maintain Growth Rate

Recommendation 1 Install a
Standardized Data Model
Companies cannot improve what they do not
measure.
Most revenue teams have plenty of data at their
ﬁngertips, but get lost when interpreting it. The
result is not identifying critical problems, and
therefore not taking the right actions to
remediate issues. Companies deﬁne their own set
of data and metrics, which makes benchmarking
against peers challenging.
This challenge can be solved by applying the
Recurring Revenue Operating Model, which
deﬁnes a standard set of metrics across all stages
of the customer journey and makes it easier to
measure, interpret, and monitor improvement.

Growth During an Economic Downturn

5 of 7

Recommendation 2
Understand And Deliver
Impact Across The Customer
Journey

winning more deals, but from a shift to winning the
right deals and helping customers achieve their
desired impact. The result is an increase in net
retention and organic customer advocacy, which
then fuels recurring revenue growth further.
Companies should identify the rational and

Recurring revenue is the result of recurring impact.

emotional impacts that customers expect when

Winning by Design’s work with more than 600

they buy, then address gaps in their ability to

SaaS companies shows that hyper-growth

deliver impact, or the customers’ ability to realize

originates not just from ﬁnding more leads and

and measure it.

4. Focus on expansion of existing clients

Awareness

Education

CR 1

CR 2

Selection

CR 3

CR 4

Commit

Onboard

Achieve
Impact

Growth

CR 5

CR 6

CR 7

1. Install a standardized data model
2. Focus on customer impact across the complete customer journey
3. Measure and manage compound impact

Figure 3. Recurring Revenue Recommendations

Recommendation 3 Focus on
Expansion of Existing Clients

growth from existing customers. By measuring and

Balance resources and time across both sides of the

retention and expansion potential. By balancing

Bowtie.
Companies typically place outsized emphasis on
the ﬁrst half of the Bowtie, the buying cycle. This

analyzing metrics from the right side of the Bowtie,
companies can determine where they have
investment across pre- and post-sale stages,
companies will maintain the gains of the last 15
months.

and winning more new deals, all of which require

Recommendation 4 Measure And Manage
Compound Impact

signiﬁcant budget investment and increase CAC.

Ensuring that customers are happy is the best way to

Instead of maintaining this old approach, most

maximize sales, marketing, and CS results.

leads to a heavy focus on awareness, education,

companies have excellent opportunities for

Growth During an Economic Downturn

6 of 7

Recurring revenue can be optimized through
incremental improvements to critical conversion
points across the customer journey. Exponential
growth can come from the compound impact of
retaining and expanding customers.
A big reason for this is that happy customers
become an extension of your marketing and sales
teams. Companies lower CAC and increase LTV
when customers stay longer, expand their spend
on your services, and support greater brand
awareness and positive perception. By knowing
which Bowtie stages have experience gaps,
Revenue teams can improve their ability to create
these gains.

Growth During an Economic Downturn

7 of 7

of 7

