HAS SaaS LOST GO-TO-MARKET FIT?
AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT
By Jacco van der Kooij and Dave Boyce
with data contribution from David Spitz

The SaaS industry is grappling with a significant decline in key performance
metrics. Since late 2021, growth rates have halved, the cost of acquiring new
customers has surged by 1.5 times, and Net Revenue Retention (NRR) has
seen a substantial decrease. Both public and private SaaS companies are
now contending with the compounded effects of these challenges.

ACT I. HAS SaaS LOST GO-TO-MARKET FIT?
The decline in SaaS Go-To-Market (GTM) metrics across the board has turned SaaS unit
economics upside down, pointing to a potential loss of GTM Fit. Simply put, what used to work no
longer works. Trendlines suggest this represents more than a temporary glitch, but rather a shift
that will have continued impact for the foreseeable future. To make matters worse, the stop-gap
solution CEOs turned to in the past is no longer viable, with investors unwilling or unable to
provide bridge financing. In the face of this new reality, CEOs must reevaluate and adapt to
changing market dynamics.

Thesis: We Have A GTM Fit Problem
Product Market Fit (PMF) is the first objective in the evolution of any new product. PMF focuses
on what products and features resonate with which customers. Having achieved Product Market
Fit, companies move toward achieving GTM Fit, aligning their product offerings with their
marketing, sales, and customer success strategies.

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

In short, while PMF focuses on what to sell, GTM Fit focuses on how to sell, using effective
customer acquisition, retention, and expansion motions. The current challenges facing SaaS are
consistent with a loss of GTM Fit. In recent years, the SaaS industry prematurely scaled GTM
motions, driven by the "grow-at-all-cost" philosophy.
FIGURE 1.

Growth at all costs led GTM motions to scale prematurely.

This approach emphasized rapid market entry and velocity, focusing on achieving swift economic
returns for stakeholders, rather than the historically more sustainable approach of first achieving
ScaleUp Fit. The concept of ScaleUp Fit revolves around careful scaling of what was found to
work during GTM Fit, expanding to new markets and segments, and adjusting along the way to
maintain favorable economics. Attempting to force this stage using growth-at-all-cost can
produce impressive growth, but with declining unit economics. In essence, it puts maximum
pressure on the system to deliver growth.
Our thesis posits that many GTM motions currently employed are, at best, prematurely scaled
and, at worst, unscalable under prevailing market conditions. This misalignment, coupled with
rapid scaling, has resulted in upside-down unit economics, indicating a loss of GTM Fit.

Evidence: The Data to Support the Thesis
Let's analyze recent trends to determine if they indicate a loss of GTM Fit:
●

A Decline in Growth Rate: Data show a significant drop in revenue growth rate (Ref. 1). This
decline can be a sign of losing GTM Fit, possibly due to changes in market needs, budgets,
or companies’ purchasing processes. A worst-case scenario would be a loss of PMF, which
signals an inability to adapt product offerings to evolving customer requirements.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 2 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

FIGURE 2.

Growth Rates among public SaaS companies have experienced a steady decline.

●

Increase in Cost to Acquire Net New Revenue: A rising cost to acquire new ARR (Ref. 2)
indicates that companies spend more to acquire and retain customers and revenue. This
can be due to a combination of GTM tactics losing effectiveness, retention and expansion
strategies struggling to produce results, or a generalized product-market mismatch.
FIGURE 3.

In two years, the cost of acquiring net new revenue increased from 150% to 264%.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 3 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

●

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

Decline in Net Revenue Retention (NRR): NRR is a key metric that reflects customer
satisfaction, loyalty, and the value customers derive from the product. A declining NRR (Ref.
3) shows customers are expanding more slowly, downgrading their subscriptions, or
churning at a higher rate. A reduction in NRR is a critical indicator of degrading GTM Fit,
implying the product no longer meets its customer base's ongoing needs or expectations.

FIGURE 4.

NRR has dropped from 1.23 to 1.13, a trend with significant downstream consequences.

TABLE 1.

Top performing SaaS companies experiencing a drop in NRR.
Jun'22*

Dec'22*

Jun'23*

Oct-23*

Snowflake

171%

165%

151%

135%

Twilio

123%

110%

103%

101%

WalkMe

120%

116%

109%

104%

Zoominfo

116%

116%

104%

104%

Cloudflare

126%

122%

115%

116%

Datadog

130%

130%

130%

120%

HashiCorp

134%

134%

127%

124%

Box

111%

110%

106%

103%

DocuSign

110%

108%

105%

102%

Gitlab

130%

130%

128%

124%

Zoom

115%

112%

109%

109%

126%

123%

117%

113%

Average

Note: (*)These reflect the dates the data was collected.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 4 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

As shown in Table 1, the NRR dropped on average among top-performing companies, from 123%
to 113%. This drop occurred despite anecdotal evidence of widespread price increases during the
same period in an effort to combat the declining NRR.
The decline in revenue growth, coupled with the escalating cost of acquiring new revenue and the
significant drop in NRR, points to a likely loss of GTM Fit. Due to the persistent degradation of
these metrics over two years, this appears to be systemic, meaning there are no quick fixes.
Companies must reevaluate and possibly reinvent their GTM strategies. For CEOs, recognizing
whether these challenges are structural is crucial. If the challenges are structural, pursuing
immediate and thoughtful action is imperative.

Heads-Up: It Is Likely To Get Worse Before It Gets Better
Considering trends across all three metrics, it seems likely the situation will worsen as costs to
acquire net new ARR continue to rise, and NRR continues to decline:
●

Continued Rise of the Cost of Net New ARR: Many organizations lack structure in their
GTM motions, characterized by an overdependence on technology and inadequately
trained personnel (Ref 7.). As these companies increasingly fall short of growth targets,
they will likely resort to lower-cost-but-less-effective demand-generation tactics. This
might include AI-powered cold email campaigns, LinkedIn blasts, or content syndication.
Such tactics can result in market oversaturation, reducing these channels' effectiveness
and increasing acquisition costs.

●

Ongoing Decline in NRR: Much of the SaaS market relies on selling services to other SaaS
companies. Considering the widespread impact of the sector's downturn, it is reasonable
to expect more cost-cutting / tool consolidation, which will likely result in the 'firing of
more apps.' This is particularly pertinent as companies approach the fiscal year-end when
CFOs traditionally scrutinize budgets and enforce necessary cuts. Underlining this trend,
Zoominfo, which reported an NRR of 104% in its most recent filing, is projected to have an
NRR below 90% at the close of FY23 (Ref. 4). It is prudent for organizations to brace for a
further decline in NRR during the first months of the year.

The decline, unfolding over the past two years, touches various aspects of the business,
confirming it is systemic. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume there is no quick fix. Time will be
part of the solution to correct this–likely two years or more.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 5 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

Astute companies will prepare for the situation to worsen during the first six months of 2024. In
the past, a miss in one portion of the GTM could be offset by overperformance elsewhere.
Because we are currently seeing degradation across the full GTM motion, the compound effects
of these misses could catch operators by surprise.

Individual departments and functions will have limited visibility of the
compound effects this will have across the business. As such, this
requires the immediate and full attention of the executive team.

Exceptions: Vertical SaaS, Isolated Regions, and Products In Demand
There are notable exceptions within the SaaS market. For instance, Vertical SaaS solutions
targeting specific segments have historically been resilient to these trends. An example would be
a company that sells to apartment building owners, auto dealerships, or senior centers.
Additionally, SaaS companies operating in standalone regions experiencing economic growth may
be less affected, like Brazil, where we see a surge in SaaS activity. Lastly, new product
developments, particularly in areas like native AI or highly in-demand product categories like
personalized security software, can tend to deviate from these general market trends.

While generalized trends vary on a per-segment basis, it is evident the
SaaS industry is contending with widespread decline in growth rate, an
increase in the cost of acquiring new revenue, and a decline in NRR. As
these trends continue to decline, it suggests an imminent loss of GTM Fit

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 6 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

ACT II. WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT
Re-establishing GTM Fit involves three simple steps that are crucial for steering SaaS companies
back to sustainable growth and market leadership:
Step 1. Cut costs to make room for growth.
Step 2. Understand, trust, and act on unit economics.
Step 3. Iteratively Improve GTM Effectiveness and Efficiency.
These steps are not hard to understand, but they can require a commitment to implement. The
complexity does not lie in the steps themselves but in the discipline and time required for
successful implementation. Dedication to this process over many quarters can be a challenge,
requiring the entire team's unwavering commitment and strategic persistence. This challenge can
be further complicated by the trend of short executive tenures, averaging less than two years.
Frequent leadership changes can disrupt the continuity and momentum necessary for systematic
course correction. With that in mind, let's take a closer look at each step.

Step 1: Cut Costs to Make Room for Growth
Many companies have already done rounds of layoffs. But for companies experiencing a loss of
GTM Fit, the work is not done. If that company’s executives have extrapolated current GTM
results over the next 12 months, they already know it's time to get drastic. This may mean closing
offices, canceling products, canceling marketing campaigns, removing long-tenured executives,
and even firing customers. It is a difficult but necessary step, similar to a phenomenon we see in
nature called “ecological succession.”
Natural habitats like forests evolve rapidly after disruptive events such as forest fires (Ref. 5.).
Just as ecological systems recalibrate and flourish by adapting to changing conditions,
businesses can also initiate their succession by cost-cutting. Careful cost-cutting removes
organizational clutter and focuses a company's most valuable resources on the initiatives with
the highest growth potential, making room for innovative, growth-oriented initiatives.
Growth reasons for cutting costs can be multifold:
●

Cost cutting can increase productivity per headcount. This can increase motivation for
remaining reps, who are more likely to achieve quota. Productivity per headcount is also a
key company-level metric for companies continuing on their IPO trajectory.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 7 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

Case Study: How Lower Rep Count Leads To An Increase In Productivity
In 2022, one of our clients reduced its sales organization from about 509 to about
286 people. Within a year, this caused the revenue production per rep to increase
significantly. In any reduction-in-force, the goal is to remove underperformers
while not adversely affecting customers, quality, or revenue. Customers and
territories are typically re-distributed to the remaining reps, whose acumen makes
them well-suited to deliver results. Cutting costs is a growth initiative in these
situations, not the opposite.
FIGURE 5.

An Increase in Productivity Compensates For Headcount Reduction.

●

Lowering cost structures can generate more free cash flow (FCF). For companies losing
money, this can extend the runway and reduce dependence on outside funding. For
companies with positive cash flow, this allows for accelerated investment in innovative
products or the deployment of a new GTM motion.

●

Removing unproductive people and assets can create a much-needed focus on areas of
growth aimed at taking a market leadership position.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 8 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

The point is this: cost-cutting–when done thoughtfully–is not merely
about survival through reduction. It is about setting the stage for a new
phase of growth and diversification, akin to ecological succession.

To understand where and how to apply these strategies, we need to comprehend the unit
economics of each GTM motion, which is the focus of the next step.

Step 2. Understand, Trust, and Act on Unit-Economics
Take a fundamental look at your business by performing a GTM Diagnostic. In this diagnostic, you
structure your operation in different GTM motions, such as a high-touch motion for your
Enterprise business, a low-touch motion for your inbound-centric SMB market, and a no-touch
PLG motion using self-service.

Treat each of your GTM motions as its own standalone business. Then,
take an honest look at the unit economics of each motion.
For each GTM motion, divide the total sales and marketing expenses (customer acquisition cost,
or CAC) by the average annual recurring contract value (ACV). This yields a CAC Payback,
expressed in years. Examine the CAC Payback for each GTM. Will this GTM pay back the
acquisition cost in the first year? If not, you are "financing" new sales and betting on the future to
pay the investment back.
In today’s economy, we would like to see the cost of acquisition paid back in 18 months, ideally
under a year. What would happen if you focus on fewer, more profitable GTM motions? If you have
several GTMs, segments, geographies, or product lines where the payback is substantially longer
than a year, consolidate or even kill them. Fold these customer bases into other segments and
care for those customers using those teams' resources. Do not skip this GTM diagnosis; if you
lack the know-how or bandwidth, hire a consultant who looks at your business without bias.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 9 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

FIGURE 6.

How CAC Payback for SaaS Companies Works.

Case in Point: When To Stop Whale Hunting
A common strategy under these circumstances is to go 'Whale Hunting' (pursue
Enterprise deals). The logic seems straightforward: if acquisition costs are high, why
not aim for Enterprise-sized contracts to justify the expense?
However, in our experience, this approach rarely works as expected. Pursuing
Enterprise deals tends to consume many more resources, including some of your
most valuable people’s time and attention. Furthermore, sales cycles for these deals
are typically prolonged, and, to make matters worse, initial contracts are often much
smaller than anticipated.
When analyzed through unit economics, an Enterprise approach will likely reveal a
high acquisition cost for a relatively low net new revenue contribution to growth. If
your enterprise GTM delivers results like this, it's time to reconsider: Stop pursuing
larger Enterprise deals. Instead, dismantle the enterprise GTM motion altogether and
reallocate high-quality resources toward accelerating revenue growth via improving
the effectiveness and efficiency* of your core GTM motions.
*Effectiveness is defined as gaining commitment for the right kind of revenue, and efficiency
is defined as acquiring revenue through the most cost-efficient use of resources.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 10 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

Step 3. Iteratively Improve GTM Effectiveness and Efficiency
Once you have cut costs to make room for growth and reallocated resources according to unit
economics, it’s time to work on what is left. To enhance your GTM strategy, focus on two crucial
areas:
1. Improve human-led processes to increase effectiveness and
2. Leverage technology (AI) to enhance efficiency.
Improving unit economics starts by maximizing efficiency in the most resource-intensive areas,
specifically human-led processes. You want all processes to be as smooth and consistent as
possible, so you can measure what works and standardize on that.
A skilled and efficient team is fundamental for successfully executing GTM motions. In this
context, implementing a training program focused on micro-skills (Sprints) can be an effective
investment of money and time. Sprints encourage iterative skill development through simple,
achievable, and targeted objectives. Sprints have been shown to boost performance by as much
as 1.5 times, measured across 50,000 opportunities in 2023 (Ref. 6).
Now that your GTM processes are proven, it's time to streamline them by incorporating
technology. The directive here is clear: automate wherever possible. The rationale behind this is
simple yet profound—if competitors automate their GTM processes before you do, they will
secure a long-term competitive advantage that is nearly impossible to recapture. Aim to build this
automation into your products wherever feasible, such as through self-service trials, personalized
onboarding, smart renewals, and expansions. Where automation is not feasible, employ AI to
augment human efforts, maximizing both effectiveness and efficiency.

While immediate improvements via human-led process optimization yield
the quickest gains, the future-proofing of your GTM strategy lies in
embracing advances in technology. Product-led and AI-enhanced GTM
can create long-term competitive advantage.
The dual approach of optimizing human-led processes and leaning into product-led and
AI-enhanced GTM ensures operational excellence now and competitive superiority in the future.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 11 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

Final Thoughts
Over the past years, companies have spread their GTM resources across numerous, often
unstructured, GTM motions in a scattergun approach. Key metrics such as a decline in growth
rate coupled with an increased acquisition cost indicate that this approach has become highly
ineffective, leading to a loss of GTM Fit. These metrics are expected to worsen in 2024, increasing
the urgency for leadership to act decisively.
As we enter 2024, no immediate, groundbreaking solution seems to be on the horizon. Neither
novel GTM motions nor significant funding rounds will be the answer. Even AI, beneficial as it is, is
still in its infancy, and it will benefit the entire market uniformly; thus, it is unlikely to offer a unique
competitive edge.

The strategy for 2024 is simple: Take control of the controllable,
consolidate GTM motions, structure them efficiently, and focus your
resources on those motions that drive growth most effectively.
Utilizing unit economics to identify the most efficient GTM motions is crucial. By strategically
channeling resources into areas with the highest growth and profit potential, particularly those
significantly contributing to Free Cash Flow (FCF), companies can reduce revenue acquisition
costs while boosting revenue growth.
This approach is more than a temporary fix; it's a long-term strategy. As technological
advancements emerge, they will be most beneficial when applied to already effective GTM
motions. Ownership should expect this realignment of performance levels with adjusted valuation
expectations to take 6-to-8 quarters. It is a logical evolution, and fewer but more valuable
companies will emerge from this period.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 12 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

References (Hyperlinks):
Ref. 1: SaaS Growth has been falling off a cliff, by David Spitz, October 2023
Ref. 2: Median GTM Spend Ratio by David Spitz, December 2023
Ref. 3: NRR is Plummeting by David Spitz, November 2023,
Ref. 4: 5 Interesting Learnings From ZoomInfo, by Jason Lemkin, November 2023
Ref. 5: Successional Theories by Cambridge Philosophical Society, July 2023
Ref. 6: Solving Underperformance by Winning by Design, August 2023
Ref. 7: The Sweet Spot In the Eye of the Storm, by Jacco van der Kooij, December 2022

Abbreviations used:
AI

Artificial Intelligence

GTM

Go-To-Market

ACV

Average Contract Value

MVP

Minimal Viable Product

ARR

Annual Recurring Revenue

NRR

Net Revenue Retention

CAC

Customer Acquisition Cost

PLG

Product Led-Growth

FCF

Free Cash Flow

PMF

Product Market Fit

SMB

Small and Medium-sized Business

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 13 OF 14

RESEARCH PAPER

HAS SAAS LOST GTM FIT AND WHAT CAN WE DO ABOUT IT

Want to keep going?
If you want to stay informed about the latest in Revenue Architecture, and be notified about the release of
the upcoming book on this topic, follow us on social media or contact us:
Book:

Revenue Architecture, available on Amazon (or contact the publisher via this link)

YouTube: Watch hundreds of videos on Recurring Revenue https://www.youtube.com/winningbydesign
LinkedIn: Follow us on https://www.linkedin.com/company/winningbydesign/
Directly: Contact us at contact@winningbydesign.com
Founded in 2012, Winning by Design is a global B2B consulting firm that enables recurring revenue teams
to design sustainable growth. Combining our specialized skills as operators of high-growth companies,
we apply scientific frameworks and proven models to help Sales, Marketing, and Customer Success
teams achieve growth.

WINNING BY DESIGN

PAGE 14 OF 14

