RESEARCH BRIEF

GTM
INTELLIGENCE
AGENTS
By Calvin Boyce, Product Manager at Winning by Design

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

GTM Intelligence Agents
By Calvin Boyce, Product Manager at Winning by Design

Research conducted Q2 2025

Research Abstract
Conversational Intelligence is a saturated market with myriad players and good
existing research that covers features and capabilities broadly. This report dives
narrowly and deeply into the GTM intelligence aspects of the broader conversational
intelligence sector, focusing speciﬁcally on GTM Intelligence Agents, who monitor
all customer conversations and structure information into actions to boost GTM
performance.
For those looking to implement these approaches, the full version includes a
feature-level vendor comparison and a ready-to-use RFP template, available to
Winning by Design Advisory Access subscribers.

CEO Take
Conversations with customers are your company’s single most valuable dataset.
Conversations are where we hear the customer’s voice, and if we’re not using AI to
learn from and generate action around those conversations, we’re losing crucial
information, resulting in lower conversion rates, slower sales cycles, and lost
customers.

Conversations with customers are your
company’s single most valuable dataset.
- Jacob Fleisher, Attention

For decades, companies have used methodologies such as BANT, MEDDICC, and
SPICED to structure customer conversations and preserve deal-level information. In
the past we relied on manual notetaking processes, and we hoped reps would adopt
our framework, document results, and effectuate handoffs rich with contextual
information. Since human follow-through is fraught,

May 1, 2025

1

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

this approach risks losing information at every handoff in the customer journey. At
best, this results in frustration for the customer. At worst, it prevents us from
delivering impact. Both of these outcomes result in lower conversion, lower renewal,
and lower expansion rates.
GTM intelligence agents join every call and meeting, read every email and Slack
message, and analyze customers’ thoughts and questions. Today’s GTM intelligence
agents automatically capture information from calls and emails, ﬁll in CRM, and then
make themselves available as a thought partner between meetings.
In an era when every source of growth counts, and customers assume seamless
information continuity because of experiences with B2C platforms, GTM intelligence
agents help reps manage with full visibility, deliver seamless experiences for
customers, and drive higher growth rates via acquisition, retention and expansion.
Operating without a GTM intelligence agent is like asking your GTM team to dig with
picks and shovels when an excavator is available. No amount of effort will help them
be more effective than their competitors until they use the available power tools.

Strategic Insights
Customer interactions are your company’s most important data, but they’re also the
least structured. AI is capable of extracting insights from large, unstructured
datasets, and it is most effective when using a framework to structure the data. This
is where methodologies come in, and we’ve been using them for decades – at least
in sales. A methodology like SPICED helps map unstructured conversations across
several engagements into what matters most to help close a deal. What is the
Situation in which your customer ﬁnds herself? What Pain is she experiencing?
What would be the Impact of overcoming that Pain? Is there a Critical Event, by which
time she needs to have solved this issue? What Decision process will she follow to
determine her path forward? MEDDIC and other methodologies have similar
objectives. Methodologies provide a structure to sort information into so we can
extract insights from an engagement with a customer.

May 1, 2025

2

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

Process ﬁrst; AI Second.
Winning by Design has conducted research showing that adherence to the SPICED
methodology increases win-rate by 10%, and quota attainment by 30%. Capturing
information from our conversations in a structured way drives improved results.
Once you’ve established a process, AI can take over the manual task of extracting
insights from customer conversations to ﬁll in the information related to your chosen
methodology and record that information in your CRM. With GTM intelligence agents
in place, as soon as a rep completes a call or receives an email, notes are already
up-to-date and structured in a consistent and repeatable way. AI can also help
identify when reps aren’t asking the right questions to uncover the appropriate
information and use that as the basis for coaching opportunities (see Winning by
Design Research Brief: AI Coaching in Go-to-Market and the Changing Role of the
Frontline Manager here »).
Structuring sales data is just the beginning. After $10M in annual recurring revenue
(ARR), growth switches from being driven primarily by acquisition to being driven by
retention and expansion. Most revenue is now contributed by the customers we
already have as they renew and expand their contracts. But pure sales
methodologies do not reﬂect that. The metrics, pain and decision criteria that we
identiﬁed with MEDDICC during sales may still be relevant, but the buyer is different,
the decision process is different, and the champion may be different. Sales
methodologies themselves improve sales, but that’s only part of the picture. When
sales operates in a silo and can’t communicate with marketing or customer success
using a common language around customer impact, the data we collect during sales
doesn’t translate. We end up with a fragmented system that does not facilitate
staying power. To further exacerbate the situation, if our data isn’t interoperable,
adding AI only makes the problem worse.

1

May 1, 2025

based on 100% SPICED completion across 50,000 closed-won or closed-lost opportunities

3

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

Retention
Outbound

Target
Sales
Expansion

Inbound

Onboard

Figure 1. The Ineﬃciency of Siloed Operations, Each with Individualized Processes and Language

This is where SPICED comes in: Situation, Pain, Impact, Critical Event, Decision. The
SPICED methodology focuses on the customer, not the seller. Accordingly, SPICED
applies during marketing and sales, but it also translates to customer success where
most revenue growth originates. SPICED provides a framework and a common
language for AI to structure customer data across the entire journey and ensure no
information loss during handoffs.
Where do handoffs come in, and how does a GTM intelligence agent make a handoff
more effective? Imagine if the same person responded to an inbound lead, qualiﬁed
the opportunity, promised impact, closed the deal, onboarded the customer, helped
them achieve ﬁrst impact, reviewed the impact that was delivered after the ﬁrst year,
secured the renewal, AND was able to promise more impact in the form of an
expanded deal. How much smoother would that process be for customers? In this
scenario, nothing falls through the cracks, because the same person has been with
the customer from the beginning, they didn’t promise anything they forgot to deliver,
and they’ve followed through each step of the way. Since this hypothetical situation is
impossible – we can’t train a single person to do all those jobs – we have a glaring
need for smooth handoffs and information transfer between customer journey
stages. With AI and the right framework, we can capture and leverage information
across the full customer-journey.

May 1, 2025

4

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

Here’s the second major lift of a GTM intelligence agent: by unifying around a
common language and establishing an operating model in the form of SPICED, we
can utilize AI to keep track of a company’s situation, the pain they experience, the
impact we’ve promised and what we’ve delivered so far, their critical events and
timeline, and their renewal decision. Different people interact with customers at
different stages of the bowtie, but why not have a single AI agent there for the whole
process? The agent won’t miss anything and will be able to get any individual up to
speed on where the customer is at.
Here are a few use cases for interrogating a GTM intelligence agent. The hypothetical
company used for this example employs a medium touch GTM motion, including a
two-stage sales motion and dedicated Customer Success Managers (CSM). They’ve
hired a GTM intelligence agent named Celeste to help facilitate handoffs:

Role

Situation

Questions for a GTM Intelligence Agent

SDR

I just got a Marketing
Qualiﬁed Lead (MQL) that I
need to further qualify for
sales engagement.

“Hey Celeste, tell me about ACME, do they ﬁt in our ICP?
Based on their information, what questions should I ask
them to uncover their pain points?”

AE

I just got a Sales Qualiﬁed
Lead (SQL) and I need to
close it

“Hey Celeste, what situation and pain did we uncover
during discovery? What impact can I promise to drive
them to make a decision? Are there any open action
items we haven’t followed up on?”

CSM

I just received a closed deal
and need to onboard it

“Hey Celeste, what impact did our AE speciﬁcally
promise during closing? What pain points haven’t been
addressed that I can ease during onboarding? How can I
tailor our product to ACME’s situation?”

CSM

I’m performing a Quarterly
Business Review 3 months
before renewal

“Hey Celeste, remind me of the impact we promised to
deliver to ACME? How have our interactions met their
needs? What further pain points could I lean into to pitch
a larger deal?”

Exec

I’m the executive sponsor on
an account, and I’ve been
asked to join a meeting.

“Hey Celeste, please catch me up on our current status
at ACME. Tell me who the main champion is, and who
our detractors are. Based on the most recent meetings,
tell me what the hottest issues are right now.”

Table 1. Examples of Role-based Inquiries for a GTM Intelligence Agent

May 1, 2025

5

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

Practical Insights
With the advent of natural language processing, software providers have rushed to
the opportunity to extract meaningful information from unstructured customer
conversations. The largest divide in the GTM intelligence market is between “builders”
and “integrators.”
Builders focus mainly on building their own platform to organize, host, and
display GTM intelligence through dashboards and scorecards in their own
website or app.
Integrators connect directly to existing systems and customize use cases to
your business, focusing primarily on presenting data in your CRM, Slack, or
other channel.
Most GTM intelligence vendors do both, but they often lean to one side or the other.

GTM Intelligence Builders
GTM intelligence builders are providing fast implementations with high visibility
across data, displaying conversational and GTM intelligence in their website and
platform. Funnel dashboards provide momentum analyses, methodology adherence,
and risk estimation for all deals at the same time. Deal dashboards provide SPICED
and other methodology summaries, activity capture/tracking, and link to source
material in individual meetings and emails. Rep dashboards track
performance/insights for all reps over time. Video libraries and call recordings are
often more robust from builders’ platforms and provide more information at a glance.
These all live in their website or app and require you to learn their platform. Builders
provide less customization, but their features are more deﬁned than integrators,
which means you don’t have to spend time deciding what you want out of your data.
It takes more work to learn a new system, but that system is often very robust and
includes more information than you knew you needed.

GTM Intelligence Integrators
GTM intelligence integrators operate under the assumption that you’ll move faster in
your existing systems by customizing agents and workﬂows into your current
platforms. Intelligence is

May 1, 2025

6

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

designed to ﬁll existing CRM reports so you spend more time in systems you’re used
to. Custom agents send reports to Slack channels to summarize common customer
pain points, product feature requests, how well reps follow through with a new pitch,
open action items, or competitor mentions. It’s easier to get exactly what you want
out of the data you have, but you do have to know what you want. You’ll get fewer
built-in features on a platform to explore, but you’ll have more control over your data
and where it gets sent.

Claap
Builders

Integrators

Figure 2. Categorization of GTM Intelligence Agents

Process, Systems, People
When implementing GTM intelligence, remember the process, systems, and people
framework. In the past we may have hired rockstar humans to sell our products, and
they may have brought their favorite processes and methodologies with them. Those
methodologies were often unique to them, and we may have had multiple people
running multiple processes. Furthermore, these processes were incompatible with
the rest of our revenue factory as we scaled.
Ideally we would want everyone standardized on the same process. This allows us
to add capacity without adding to confusion. To that end, we must focus on deﬁning
and installing proven processes ﬁrst, then putting systems in place that reinforce
those processes, and ﬁnally adding high performers to the mix to maximize your
investment. This is a process-ﬁrst approach, and this leads to stability and scalability
within our GTM organization.

May 1, 2025

7

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

designed to ﬁll existing CRM reports so you spend more time in systems you’re used
to. Custom agents send reports to Slack channels to summarize common customer
pain points, product feature requests, how well reps follow through with a new pitch,
open action items, or competitor mentions. It’s easier to get exactly what you want
out of the data you have, but you do have to know what you want. You’ll get fewer
built-in features on a platform to explore, but you’ll have more control over your data
and where it gets sent.

Destabilizes as it grows

Stabilizes as it grows

SYSTEMS & PROCESSES
PEOPLE
TECHNOLOGY

PHASE
SHIFT

TECHNOLOGY

PEOPLE
SYSTEMS & PROCESSES

Figure 3. Contrast Between a People-First vs. a Process-First Organization

Process
To capture customer data across the bowtie, we recommend focusing on uncovering
pain and impact using SPICED as an operating model. If you’re using a framework
that caters only to sales, you may improve your acquisition. But when most of your
revenue comes from retention and expansion, you’ll be unable to translate this
sales-speciﬁc information to the other parts of your organization, designed to deliver
impact and expand customer relationships. If your GTM intelligence vendor supports
SPICED, your data will be ideally structured to hand a deal off to customer success
without losing sight of impact.

May 1, 2025

8

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

S
SITUATION
SEQUENTIAL

P
CUSTOMER
CENTRIC

PAIN

I

Relevant background facts or circumstances about the
customer's organization. It includes company size, location,
number of employees, software used, hiring needs, security
requirements, maturity level, and revenue goals.

Represents the problem or opportunity the customer is
facing and for which they require a solution. Pain is often
initially expressed at a surface level, and a deeper diagnosis
is needed to uncover the underlying needs.

Speciﬁc outcomes that can be achieved by addressing the
customer's pain. It encompasses both Emotional Impact,

IMPACT

which relates to individual experiences, and Rational Impact,
which focuses on the overall beneﬁts for the company.

CE

A deadline or time-sensitive milestone by which the

CAUSAL

CRITICAL
EVENT

DECISION AS AN
OUTCOME

D
DECISION

customer must achieve the desired Impact or face
negative consequences. Critical events drive behavior,
inﬂuence actions, expand product usage, renew, and upsell.

The people involved, the decision-making process, and
the criteria used to evaluate and select the right solution.
Understanding these aspects is crucial for effectively
navigating the decision-making journey with the customer.

Systems
Conversational intelligence is a saturated market, but the subset of GTM intelligence
is a core value focus for most vendors. Many well-established AI notetakers are now
realizing the importance of GTM intelligence and improving functionality in this
space, while newer solutions are developing features with GTM intelligence at the
core of their product.
Regardless of the vendor, here are a few key considerations when implementing a
GTM intelligence agent:

May 1, 2025

9

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

Data sources
Consider where most of your customer data comes from. Do you have conversations
over email? Slack? In Zoom, Google Meet, or Teams meetings? How much data is
already stored in your CRM, and how do you want to read that data? Find a vendor
that gathers enough data to accurately represent the status of your customers.
Agentic capabilities
While some vendors present deal-level information only in dashboards, others have
created copilots that can talk you through the status of your deals. Many vendors
draft and send emails for you, or proactively push data into Slack during handoffs.
Editable AI
AI does a great job of aggregating your conversations into structured outputs and
summaries, but it gets this wrong sometimes. Humans should always have the last
say in data they’re accountable for. How would it affect your workﬂow with a
particular vendor if their summary is inaccurate and you want to adjust a SPICED
summary or other CRM notes?
Data extraction
How easy is it to get raw data out of the platform you choose? Can you download
transcripts and meeting recordings? Depending on your use case, it can be important
to share meeting information in various formats both inside and outside your
organization. If you want to build your own custom integrations, learn more about API
access to meeting details.

People
The GTM intelligence implementation should be owned by Revenue Operations, who
will be responsible for adoption and training in the solution you choose. It’s also
important to regularly review how well your GTM intelligence agent represents the
experiences of your sales and CS reps. AI needs to be managed and coached just like
a human does. Providing regular feedback to your vendor of choice will ensure your
AI is working for you as eﬃciently and effectively as possible.

May 1, 2025

10

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

Once your GTM intelligence agent is in place, it can serve as the foundation for
ongoing deal reviews and coaching. Determine how front-line managers can use
dashboards, summaries, and key moment markers to review customer engagements
and coach reps on their ability to reinforce SPICED or whatever other methodology /
process you are using. AI + human coaching is an ideal way to leverage the capacity
of your front-line managers. Even more leverage is available if you use AI to do some
of the coaching independently (see Winning by Design Research Brief: AI Coaching in
Go-to-Market and the Changing Role of the Frontline Manager here »).

Final Thoughts
The most important input to growth is the impact our customers experience with our
product. And the most important information we have about that impact–both
promised and delivered–is contained in the conversations we have with customers.
To responsibly manage growth across the bowtie, we must have visibility to
customer conversations. GTM intelligence agents are the key to gathering and
organizing information from customer conversations in a way that facilitates
smoother handoffs, more closed deals, actionable sales and customer success
trends, and even product feedback.
If you do not have a GTM intelligence agent working for you right now, run-don’t-walk
toward solving this. Find a solution that reads as much of your data as possible and
presents it in the format you prefer. There are plenty of vendors collecting intelligence
on sales data; fewer vendors are collecting intelligence on customer success, which
is where most of your revenue is coming from after $10M in revenue. The most
advanced agents are using SPICED as an operating model to structure GTM
intelligence across the entire customer journey, from awareness through impact,
through expansion.
Winning by Design’s partners, certiﬁed to implement SPICED across the customer
journey, include: Grain, Momentum, Fathom

Want to make this happen?
Book Time with an Advisor

May 1, 2025

11

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
The following supplementary materials are available in the full version
of this report, available to subscribers in the reference library. For more
information on subscribing, see winningbydesign.com/access-pass.

01 Vendor Descriptions
02 Vendor Comparison
03 RFP Template
04 SPICED Blueprint
05 Coaching with Gong Trackers
06 The GTM Model

May 1, 2025

12

GTM Intelligence Agents

Winning by Design Proprietary

READ OUR OTHER AI AGENT RESEARCH REPORTS

AI AGENTS: RESEARCH ACROSS THE BOWTIE

Like what you read?
Send to a Colleague

May 1, 2025

13

