REVENUE
ARCHITECTURE

CHAPTER ONE

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

01
INTRODUCTION

ISBN: 979-8-218-96493-1
DISCLAIMER: The information provided in this book is intended for informational purposes
only and should not be construed as legal, ﬁnancial, or professional advice. The views expressed
herein are those of the author alone and may not reﬂect those of any organization or entity with
which the author is aﬃliated. While every effort has been made to ensure the accuracy of the
information presented, the author and publisher make no representation or warranties with
respect to the accuracy, applicability, ﬁtness, or completeness of the book’s contents. The author
shall not be liable nor responsible for any loss or damage allegedly arising from any information
or suggestion within this book. The reader is responsible for performing their own due diligence
and should seek the advice of qualiﬁed professionals before making any decisions related
to the content of this book.
Copyright © 2023. Published by Winning By Design, LLC, a Delaware Company. All rights
reserved as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976. No part of this book
may be reproduced, used, or distributed in any form or by any means, without expressed
written consent of the publisher. For permissions or other inquiries, please contact us at
Info@WinningByDesign.com. The contents of this book were created in the United States
of America.
First Edition, revision 1.2, January 29, 2024
Unless otherwise stated, all graphs and visual aids included in this book were designed
and produced by Winning by Design Creative. Special thanks to Roee Hartuv, Dan Smith,
Jackie Kummerl, Oren Lavi, Alex Esser, Dominique Levin, Dave Boyce, Calvin Boyce, David
Spitz, and Sari Green for their hard work, input, and guidance.
To our readers, thank you for embarking on this journey with us. We hope the insights and
strategies shared in these pages empower you to achieve new heights in your business.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

01

INTRODUCTION

A few years ago, we witnessed one of the most remarkable human-made
wonders ever. Nearly all of humankind came to depend on it overnight. Yet,
even today, few can pinpoint what it was, as it was obscured by the events
that followed. This book not only unveils the source code behind this modern
marvel but also provides the blueprint to recreate its magic.
In 2020, the world faced a crisis of monumental proportions: a global pandemic.
Almost overnight, remote work became not the exception, but the rule. Billions
relied on their phones, tablets, and computers to navigate the intricacies of daily
life—to work, communicate with family, participate in their communities, and go to
school. At some point during the pandemic, nearly everyone on earth who had a
smartphone installed a product like Zoom, hosted on a ubiquitous infrastructure
known as “the cloud.” The technology deployed on an unprecedented scale, and
against all odds, it worked ﬂawlessly. Students and teachers, schools and
governments—everyone found themselves relying on the cloud.
Amid the chaos and upheaval of a global pandemic, a quiet wonder had
occurred—one that many of us took for granted, even while it underpinned
nearly every facet of our lives: the cloud had come to our rescue. This wonder
didn’t just suddenly appear; it came about through decades of incremental
advancements in global infrastructure and software that allowed the cloud to
embrace the moment. The term “the cloud” may sound ﬂuffy, but there is much
more to it than its nebulous name suggests.

4

The cloud came to exist because it was heavily inﬂuenced by the following:
1. The Internet: The triumph of SaaS, or Software as a Service, in 2020 was
rooted in an intricate web of interconnected servers and computing power
built over the previous 30 years. This offered extensive, seamless, and
ubiquitous access to the cloud regardless of geographical location.
2. Smartphones: Devices permeate every aspect of our lives. With over 6.5
billion smartphones in the market, approximately 2 out of every 3 individuals
had direct access to the cloud infrastructure.
3. A Diverse Landscape of Applications: With many applications available,
virtually every need could be catered to. Communication apps such as Zoom
(see Figure 1.1) gained immense popularity, fostering seamless connections
between people regardless of their physical isolation.
These building blocks forged a highly reliable global infrastructure serving
billions of users worldwide. Yet, one crucial building block has gone unnoticed:
4. Innovative Business Models: The industry embraced a novel business
approach, enabling access to essential services through subscription- or
usage-based fees on a recurring basis. The most popular use case is SaaS.
This innovation facilitated ubiquitous access and enabled everyone with a
smartphone to partake.
Before the pandemic, many industry experts doubted a cloud-based
infrastructure could carry the performance needed for global Enterprise-grade
systems. However, the 2020 pandemic proved them wrong. Overnight, every
business, government, and educational institution worldwide became dependent
on cloud products and experienced the beneﬁts of a subscription-based
approach using a recurring revenue model. In the middle of 2020, we pinched
ourselves, for we had all witnessed a wonder: during the pandemic, the entire
world had become dependent on subscription- and consumption-based services
overnight, and it did so without a hitch. It felt as if SaaS products and their novel
pay structures had just saved the world.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

The explosive growth of communication applications in B2B during the pandemic
reﬂected by the rise in the number of Zoom customers with more than 10 employees.

Customers (>10 seats)

FIGURE 1.1

The 2020
Pandemic

Next, we will dissect the factors behind the rapid growth and the subsequent
market crash, analyzing its underlying causes, in Section 1.1 The Golden Era.
This exploration will help set the stage for where we are headed next and how to
get there, introducing 3 key concepts:
● Section 1.2 The Revenue Factory: We'll delve into the Factory concept,
which offers a blueprint for sustainable growth and operational eﬃciency in
recurring revenue businesses.
● Section 1.3 The Go-To-Market (GTM) Approach: Moving away from the
siloed operation, we'll explore a GTM approach where revenue is generated
through a uniﬁed organizational effort akin to a factory's production line.
● Section 1.4 Phase Shifting: An examination of how recurring revenue
businesses undergo several fundamental changes quickly, a concept known
as Phase Shifts. The focus will be on managing through these numerous
phase shifts smoothly, which most management teams are unfamiliar with.
Collectively, they do not just narrate a shift in strategic thinking; they propel us
into an exciting future and act as tools to navigate the modern economic
landscape's ever-changing landscape.

6

AMBIGUOUS SAAS TERMINOLOGY EXPLAINED
SaaS is a versatile term that encompasses various aspects of the software
delivery model. It plays a pivotal role in modern technology, and its usage
can be classiﬁed into 3 categories:
● SaaS as a Delivery Model: Refers to cloud-hosted applications
accessed via the internet through subscription-based services. Users
lease the software instead of owning it outright. The advantages
include accessibility from any internet connection and regular software
updates and maintenance without the hassle of manual installations.
● SaaS as a Business Model: Includes both subscription-based and
consumption-based agreements. Subscription-based agreements
specify the duration of software access, ranging from daily to annual
terms, while consumption-based agreements detail the usage-based
terms and pricing, aligning costs with the actual use of the software.
● SaaS as a Payment Structure: Encompasses recurring payments
based on the terms outlined in a subscription contract. Recurring
payments provide a more dependable and continuous stream of
income, allowing for better resource allocation. Due to the need to
provide ongoing results to retain customers, it naturally fosters
long-term relationships with customers, making it customer-centric.

FIGURE 1.2

The term “SaaS” means different things to different people.

DELIVERY MODEL

BUSINESS MODEL

PAYMENT STRUCTURE

Hosted in the cloud

A subscription or a
consumption service

Recurring revenue

SaaS

SUBSCRIBE

$

Throughout this document, we will limit the use of “SaaS” and instead refer
to “Recurring Revenue,” indicating its use as a payment structure, or
“Subscription” to reﬂect on it as a business model. This approach provides
a clearer delineation of the multifaceted role of SaaS in the software
industry.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

1.1

THE GOLDEN ERA
While the number of subscription services were exploding and valuations were
catapulting, underneath, a ﬁre was smoldering. Most of these companies were
being built on a “growth-at-all-costs” mindset, and the sudden increase in
usage made their structural and conceptual weaknesses more pronounced.
To create more growth, more people were hired, and more attention was paid
to short-term wins without applying short- or long-term ﬁnancial discipline.
Unsurprisingly, this resulted in a steep increase in the cost of acquisitions.
Meanwhile, companies went public with less revenue, relying on more
immature Sales and Marketing motions. Surely this could not continue? All
this led to 2021, a year that marked a watershed era of success for the SaaS
industry: 27 Initial Public Offerings (IPOs), and an astonishing 787 unicorns
were minted, according to DealRoom. This surge was largely fueled by the
continued growth-at-all-costs mindset.
The SaaS Crash
In 2021, after more than a decade of intense growth, signs of a coming
transformation began to emerge. In November 2021, the SaaS stock market
peaked. However, on December 3, 2021, the ﬁrst domino fell as the Wall Street
Journal reported, "DocuSign Shares Fall More Than 40% as Customer Behavior
Shifts." At the start of 2022, a casual observer might have judged everything to
be ﬁne, but by then, geopolitics and other emerging challenges had begun to
slow down the economy.
In February 2022, many marketing leaders noticed a sluggish lead ﬂow, and in
the following months, sales leaders started to see deals being delayed. Naturally,
booking performance fell short, and soon after, the growth rate began to decline,
slowing down funding and delaying IPOs. With less money available to invest,
the valuations of Startups dropped. Market reporter Rebecca Szkutak published
an article on March 23, 2022, entitled "Record-Setting Venture Capital Market
Shows Signs of a Slowdown.”

8

By mid 2022, the situation had worsened, and venture ﬁrms started
to recommend their portfolio companies cut costs by 20% across the board,
while others advised surgically paring down expenses. However, it was too late;
the damage was done. The SaaS market had crashed, marking the end of an
11-year tech bull market that resulted in a historic 50% value destruction in
public (and private) SaaS companies, with the average market cap down 57%
from its 12-month highs. This massive reduction in market value impacted
public SaaS companies and hit the entire tech ecosystem like a tidal wave.
FIGURE 1.3

Performance of SaaS companies over time, normalized against January 2012 by SaaS
Capital Index®.

THE GOLDEN ERA.
1200%

THE
SAAS
CRASH

800%

400%

0%

2012

Time (years)

PANDEMIC

2023

The end of the Golden Era of SaaS had come. An era that began with Marc
Andreessen's prescient words in 2011, "Why Software is Eating the World,"
crashed during the winter of 2022 and ended with an exclamation point with the
collapse of Silicon Valley Bank on March 10, 2023. So, where do we go from
here? To learn where we are going we must ﬁrst delve into the origins of this
turmoil.
The new situation we ﬁnd ourselves in demands a new operational framework.
But to do that, we have one important thing to do. We must ﬁrst identify the root
cause of the crash to prevent it from ever happening again.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

What Caused the SaaS Crash?
The SaaS crash did not come as a surprise to everyone. Many industry experts
had warned of the market’s unsustainability in the years leading up to this.
However, the speed at which it happened and the widespread impact of the
crash still caught many off guard. For far too long, the market had coasted on
a diet of ﬁnancial junk food, propelled by cheap investment money warranted
by occasional bursts of explosive growth in a particular sector.
Various factors contributed to this unprecedented fall, including rising interest
rates, the end of the COVID inﬂation, macroeconomic risks, and geopolitical
uncertainties like the war in Europe. While these events certainly played an
important role and may have caused the situation to spill over, they were not its
root causes. An average customer buying a license to sign electronic
documents or to use communication software is typically disconnected from
U.S. bond prices. And let's not forget that customers were still buying and
feverishly using SaaS products when this occurred. So what was the cause?
During the Golden Era of SaaS, the prolonged period of low interest rates led to
abundant investor capital. It enabled SaaS investments to grow without regard
to near-term proﬁtability, a Go-To-Market (GTM) approach that has since been
coined “growth at all costs.” To ﬁnd the actual problem, let's analyze what the
growth-at-all-costs GTM approach is.
The Growth-at-All-Costs Culture
During the Golden Era the market rewarded growth at SaaS companies with
higher valuations. Entrepreneurs quickly realized that the faster the growth,
the higher the valuation, thereby increasing the likelihood of going public.
Investors themselves also favored this trend, as an investment made at a
given valuation could swiftly be justiﬁed by the next investor willing to invest
at multiple times that valuation. Ultimately, the public markets rewarded
founders, allowing them to amass unimaginable wealth and helping investors
achieve their Internal Rate of Return, or IRR, targets. It resulted in companies
hiring unskilled labor, purchasing a myriad of tools, and applying unproven
methods—all of which contributed to the soaring costs found on most SaaS
companies' ﬁnancial statements.

10

In practical terms, the quality of the customer experience was considered
secondary to the growth rate. This approach compelled organizations to focus
on seeking more revenue, leading to an emphasis on acquiring more deals and
leads. Unfortunately, this relentless pursuit of more led to organizations using
spam-like tactics and handing over control to the lowest-cost and least-skilled
laborers who used the advances of email automation to SPAM prospects and
customers. This GTM approach caused overall costs to skyrocket, resulting in a
chaotic array of tools and methods. Consequently, departments operated
ineffectively and ineﬃciently, pressuring companies to search for more leads to
create more deals and generate more revenue. The growth-at-all-costs mentality
fostered an "always do more" culture. It's important to note that the industry
wasn't oblivious to these issues.
As early as 2016, it became evident that the current growth tactics wouldn't be
sustainable in the long run. In fact, by 2018, the industry recognized the
necessity for a more cost-eﬃcient approach to growth and initiated efforts to
address the situation. However, when the pandemic struck, these corrective
initiatives were set aside. If anything, the pandemic further fueled the ﬂames of
the growth-at-all-costs mindset, intensifying an already precarious situation.
Who's to Blame?
Although we may be quick to point ﬁngers at investors as the root of all this,
such blame is unfair and inaccurate; entrepreneurs were equally at fault. A
pattern had emerged: pursue growth at all costs, and receive higher and higher
valuations. Investors could justify their investment, with each of these valuations
doubling or tripling. Companies could get to the public market faster, where the
founders and investors could take their chips off the table and become wealthy.
Then, technology vendors such as email automation providers, service providers,
and consultants came along to fan the ﬂames. Everyone was contributing to the
hype. It was not the fault of a single party. It was an entire industry's doing, and it
brought us to where we are today, with tens of thousands of SaaS companies
sitting on a mature global infrastructure with over a billion users—not a bad
place to be, and a fantastic foundation upon which to build.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

The Road from Growth at All Costs Leads to Sustainable Growth
SaaS as an industry has undergone a signiﬁcant transformation over the last
decade, marked by 4 distinct eras:
● In 2012, we witnessed a surge in growth fueled by low interest rates,
fostering a growth-at-all-costs mentality, which inevitably led to bloated
cost structures.
● Starting in 2020, growth stalled amid economic uncertainty and recession
fears, while high acquisition costs persisted. Rising interest rates began to
compress valuation multiples from as much as 40x down to 8x.
● In 2022, there was a signiﬁcant shift towards cost control. Then, in early
2023, the collapse of SVB marked a turning point away from the
growth-at-all-costs trend. However, even as companies started reducing
growth guidance, expense cuts remained relatively shallow.
● In 2024, the era of sustainable growth begins. Companies are starting
to manage the costs of growth and aim for a long-term target of 30%
operating margins. Highly proﬁtable, high-growth companies are
emerging.
This trajectory shows a clear path toward a more proﬁtable and sustainable
future.
In summary: During the Golden Era, SaaS companies aimed for high valuations,
often relying on a single metric—the growth rate. With ready access to low-cost
capital, they received virtually unlimited funding, driving growth with minimal
oversight, resulting in a pervasive growth-at-all-costs mentality. This relentless
pursuit of growth led to an increased demand for unskilled and
technology–assisted labor, prioritizing quantity over quality in serving
customers. The time has come to transition to a new, more sustainable
framework. It promises an era of sustainable growth and the rise of high-quality,
billion-dollar B2B software companies. As we look toward a future deﬁned by
growth, we turn our attention to an unconventional yet promising domain—the
factory model.

12

1.2

THE RECURRING REVENUE FACTORY
When one thinks of a factory, images of stark, grueling environments with
monotonous production lines may come to mind—hardly the ideal of a dynamic
modern workplace. Of course, this isn't the vision we aim for with the recurring
revenue factory. Consider this: throughout history, factories have spearheaded
technological advances to the extent that today, we give a number to the
industrial revolutions they have caused. Each has brought a monumental shift
made possible by new foundational principles upon which the next generation
of factories could be built. We envision the revenue factory as an example of a
fourth-generation factory designed to drive eﬃcient, high-quality growth.
The Goal of a Factory: Cost Eﬃcient Production of Quality Products
Factories have always served as symbols of the implementation of organized,
systematic methodologies. At its core, a factory aims to enhance production and
achieve economies of scale, leading to reduced unit costs as production
numbers increase. However, the pursuit of increased volume and cost reduction
historically has resulted in quality issues. This brings us to a third crucial goal of
a factory, as emphasized by the renowned W. Edwards Deming: Quality. His
approach to quality is deeply rooted in processes that prioritize the customer,
rely on data-driven decision-making, and embrace a culture of continuous
improvement. Deming's teachings on quality management have left an indelible
mark on the manufacturing industry and played a pivotal role in shaping the
global quality management movement.

1.2.1

The Impact of the Industrial Revolution
The Industrial Revolution transformed small, decentralized, and often craftbased workshops into large-scale, centralized, and mechanized industrial
facilities. These advances span multiple generations. Known as "industrial
revolutions," each marks a major shift in industrial and technological capabilities.
These revolutions have reshaped our world, resulting in profound changes
across social, economic, and technological dimensions.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

FIGURE 1.4

The 4th Industrial Revolution is marked by cloud computing, machine learning, and AI.

THE LEAP WE
ARE MAKING

FACTORY 1.0

FACTORY 2.0

FACTORY 3.0

FACTORY 4.0

MECHANIZATION

ELECTRIFICATION

AUTOMATION

CYBER-PHYSICAL

Introduction of power
by water and steam to
mechanize labor.

Mass production
through assembly
lines using electrical
power.

Use of networks,
computers, and
robotics to automate
production.

Use of cyber-physical
systems, cloud
computing, machine
learning, and AI.

The Golden Era Thrived on Automation, Part of the Third Industrial Revolution
For example, during the Golden Era, many developments were the result of the
Third Industrial Revolution (3IR). With the transition to a subscription-based
revenue model, the revenue per customer declined, necessitating a signiﬁcant
increase in customer acquisition to meet growth objectives. This led to a
demand for more customers and leads well before achieving operational
maturity to handle such growth. The SaaS industry turned to a product of the
Third Industrial Revolution: Automation. Email automation, in particular,
played a pivotal role in increasing production of emails, enhancing production
consistency through email sequencing, and improving quality using templated
emails. This approach, by its very nature, led to cost reduction, as a single
prospector with automation tools could achieve the work of many
prospectors doing this manually.
Today We Are in the Fourth Industrial Revolution
Today, we ﬁnd ourselves in the Fourth Industrial Revolution (4IR), marked
by Machine Learning (ML) and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI). These advances
rely on processes to make data-driven decisions. Although it's still early, the
technological advances have already led to transformative apps, such as
personalized customer experiences driven by the analysis of usage
patterns, real-time coaching (co-pilots), dynamic pricing responding to
demand, and predictive forecasting, to name a few.

14

1.2.2

Mapping a Factory Approach to Producing Recurring Revenue
The analogy of a subscription business with a factory extends beyond mere
automation. Just like a factory that produces revenue growth, a subscription
business operates with similar objectives. In fact, the goals of a factory align to
those of a recurring revenue business perfectly:
Factory Goals

Goals of a Recurring Revenue Factory

● Increase Production

⇒

Achieve Growth

● Improve Eﬃciency

⇒

Lower Costs

● Enhance Quality

⇒

Deliver the Promised Impact

The ﬁrst goal in both factories and subscription businesses is clear: increase
output. In factories, this means more production, akin to achieving growth in
subscription businesses. Historically this was driven by a growth-at-all-costs
approach. Today's emphasis on sustainable growth in subscriptions mirrors the
factory's aim for eﬃciency. The analogy further extends to the methods of
increasing output: just as factories use different production lines to create a
variety of products from the same materials, subscription businesses deploy
various GTM motions to diversify their revenue streams
FIGURE 1.5

A subscription business operates like a revenue factory with a number of production
lines (GTM motions). Each production line signiﬁes a different revenue stream,
characterized by speciﬁc growth metrics and cost structures.

REVENUE FACTORY

PRODUCTION LINES

REVENUE PRODUCTION

GTM Motion A
ARR (A)

GTM Motion B
ARR (B)
Deliver a quality product
that produces revenue growth
in a cost-eﬃcient way

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

GTM Motion C
ARR (C)

Similarly, we can identify the shift toward cost-conscious growth, which today
is referred to as “sustainable growth,” prioritizing cost reduction, or what VCs
have termed “capital-eﬃcient growth,” aimed at increasing Free Cash Flow.
These objectives are inward-focused and do not directly beneﬁt the customer.
This is where the importance of the third goal, Quality, becomes evident. In a
factory context, “Quality” signiﬁes a product's consistent ability to perform its
intended function. When applied to SaaS products, this concept translates to
its ability to reliably deliver the promised results, again and again, commonly
referred to as “delivering recurring impact.” To implement the Recurring
Revenue Factory, we can identify the essential tasks:
● Achieve Growth

⇒

Implement eﬃcient processes for scalability.

● Lower Costs

⇒

Apply unit economics to ensure sustainability.

● Recurring Impact ⇒

Instill quality management for long-term durability.

Historically, operationalization followed a departmental approach, where each
department aimed to achieve speciﬁc targets. However, achieving results in a
Recurring Revenue Factory requires a more integrated approach, which we will
refer to as the GTM approach. This approach emphasizes cross-functional
collaboration and alignment across departments to drive recurring impact.

SUSTAINABLE VS. CAPITAL-EFFICIENT GROWTH
Sustainable and capital-eﬃcient growth are similar but not the same:
Sustainable growth involves maintaining a consistent long-term growth
rate without encountering operational or ﬁnancial hurdles. Companies
achieving this show strong revenue retention metrics like GRR and NRR,
balancing resource allocation. On the other hand, capital-eﬃcient growth
focuses on how well a company uses its capital for expansion, typically
measured by revenue or proﬁt per investment unit, with Free Cash Flow
(FCF) as a key metric. While sustainable growth is about long term
viability, capital-eﬃcient growth aims for cost-effective expansion. Both
are crucial for the success of a recurring revenue business.

16

1.2.3

The Increase in Volume and Velocity
In 2010, closing a perpetual software deal in the enterprise sector could generate
revenue ranging from $500,000 to $10,000,000 up front. These numbers typically
did not account for an additional 18% to 22% per year allocated for annual
upgrade and support contracts, which were commonly established for at least
another 3 years. Enterprise sellers would concentrate on a restricted number of
qualiﬁed opportunities annually, typically achieving a 30% win rate. Sales cycles in
this context often extended for an average of 18 months, and in some instances,
as long as 3 years. This level of effort would typically generate annual revenue of
around $2,000,000 for a junior rep and well above $4,000,000 for a senior rep.
We can compare that to the subscription-based services market in which a
solution similar in scope brings in $100,000 in annual contract value (ACV) with a
sales cycle ranging from 6 to 9 months. In this scenario, the same experienced
rep would carry a lower target around $1,200,000. This would require the rep to
secure 12 commitments per year. Based on today's win rate of 20%, the seller
would, therefore, need to work on 60 qualiﬁed opportunities per year. This would
be a challenge for most of today’s enterprise reps. When we contrast this with an
SMB sale, these numbers escalate even further. For example, a deal with an ACV
of $10,000 against a quota of $500,000 requires a total of 50 wins per year and
require as many as 50 qualiﬁed opportunities per month. Win rates and sales
cycles will vary depending on factors such as industry, product, market
conditions, and company strategies. However, the overall outcome remains the
same: a much higher velocity and an order of magnitude increase in deal volume
compared to a perpetual business.
In summary: The goal of a recurring revenue business is to achieve the highest
growth rate in the most cost-eﬃcient manner. The Revenue Factory tackles this
challenge by streamlining processes and enhancing eﬃciency through iterative
improvements, thereby ensuring consistent delivery of recurring impact. To
achieve this, companies must shift from a traditional departmental approach to a
more collaborative, cross-departmental approach known as a GTM approach.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

1.3

THE GO-TO-MARKET APPROACH
The integration of various functions in marketing, sales, and customer success
forms what is referred to as the Go-To-Market (GTM) approach. This approach
aligns the product with market needs and business goals. It aims to build
awareness among prospective customers, educate them on the product's
merits, help sell it effectively and eﬃciently, and importantly, ensure consistent
delivery on what was promised. The GTM approach serves as the driving force
behind growth, and its signiﬁcance cannot be overstated.
Today's Departmental Approach
Traditionally, each department functioned autonomously, employing distinct
means and methods to achieve its objectives. For example, the marketing
department, led by the CMO, focused on generating awareness and providing
qualiﬁed leads to support the sales team. Similarly, the sales and customer
success departments operated independently, each with its own set of metrics
and tools speciﬁc to their functions. However, it doesn't stop there. Companies
structure and organize their resources differently within each department.
Marketing departments are divided into distinct functions that operate in parallel,
such as Content Marketing, Email Marketing, and Demand Generation, with each
responsible for speciﬁc programs or campaigns.

FIGURE 1.6

Today, recurring revenue businesses operate in silos, in which each department focuses
on its own objectives. A GTM approach breaks down these silos and emphasizes
cross-functional collaboration and alignment across departments.

Department 1

Department 2

Department 3

Marketing

Sales

Customer
Success
GTM
APPROACH

DEPARTMENTAL
APPROACH

18

Sales teams are segmented based on regions, vertical markets, or company
size. Customer success is typically organized with functions operating
sequentially, such as onboarding, renewals, and expansion.
The Impact of Silos
With the departmental approach, each department has its unique structure built
around speciﬁc deliverables. The consequence of such an approach is that it
creates silos within the organization. These silos in turn create ineﬃciencies,
including duplicated efforts and a lack of alignment towards broader company
objectives. For instance, the marketing team might focus on generating leads
that the sales team is unaware of, or the customer success team might miss
opportunities for upselling or cross-selling due to a lack of alignment with the
sales department. Team members working from different locations (remote)
further complicates cross-department/cross- functional coordination. Such a
lack of coordination has hindered overall company performance and growth.
This heightened level of complexity necessitates organized restructuring,
leading us to a cross-functional GTM approach where departments work
collaboratively and share information to achieve the common objective: deliver
Recurring Impact to attain Recurring Revenue. This shift aims to break down the
silos, leading to greater organizational eﬃciency and effectiveness.

FIGURE 1.7

The median headcount by fundraising stage was recorded by Carta in 2021. It shows the
10x growth in headcount which causes ﬁefdom building. Such rapid growth occurs at the
moment the organization still lacks processes.

Headcount

Median
Headcount

From Series A to Series D,
the median headcount of a
Startup grows by 10x.
33%
66%
87%
121%
225%

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

162%

Growth
rate from
prior raise

1.3.1

Introducing the GTM Motion
Where a factory has product lines, a revenue factory has GTM motions. A GTM
motion refers to a company's structured set of activities, tactics, and processes
that span across the entire customer journey. It starts with ﬁnding prospects,
qualiﬁes them, and ultimately turns them into satisﬁed customers. This approach
involves collaboration across functions from the marketing, sales, and customer
success departments. The aim of a GTM motion is to enhance organizational
eﬃciency by reducing costs and boosting effectiveness through increased
production or growth, alongside improving customer experience.
Go Fast and Go Long
Different types of GTM motions are suited to different business models, products,
and customer bases. They are essential for scaling business operations and
achieving a sustainable, proﬁtable growth rate. For example, an "inbound GTM
motion" might involve generating leads through content marketing, qualifying
them via technology or human interactions, and then handing them off to a sales
team to gain a commitment. In that scenario, they will trigger dozens of
micro-actions, pass through at least 3 different departments, and do so all within
mere minutes.

FIGURE 1.8

An example of a high-velocity inbound GTM motion, as perceived from the customer's
perspective. It involves multiple actions across many functions and 3 departments

MARKETING
DEPARTMENT

CUSTOMER
SUCCESS
DEPARTMENT

SALES
DEPARTMENT

Visit a
website

Download
content

Click
Contact Us

Expand

Learn more
about the
offering

Review
price and
terms

Commit
and
activate

Use the
product and
get the impact

Recurring
Revenue

Advocate

20

On the other hand, an "Enterprise motion" might involve targeted outreach to
large companies, using a dedicated sales force backed by high-level marketing
and account management efforts. This may take a consistent approach for a
long period of time. The goal of a GTM motion is to ensure that, amid all this
activity, the customer has the best possible experience. It aims to create
coherence across all these actions and make the interactions appear smooth.
For this we are going to use the concept of GTM motions.

1.3.2

Different GTM Motions
Thinking about GTM motions leads us to a deeper understanding of revenue
growth and its associated costs, both of which are essential components of
achieving a proﬁtable business model. In this book we will explore the following
5 GTM motions:
● No Touch: Customers are marketing, selling, and servicing the products.
● Low Touch: Marketing, sales, and support relies on technology, like chatbots,
with personal engagement reserved for more complex situations.
● Medium Touch: Involves specialized roles like a Sales Development Rep
(SDR) or Customer Success Manager (CSM) qualifying a customer's needs
before involving a Sales Manager or product expert.
● High Touch: A Sales Manager or Customer Success Manager, often
ﬁeld-based, oversees a small portfolio of accounts. For advanced
solutions, this likely involves support from a Solutions Architect.
● Dedicated Touch: A dedicated team solely focused on serving one
large Fortune 500 account, often led by an executive who reports
directly to the CEO, ensuring a comprehensive approach to both sales
and service needs.
Each of these GTM motions operates on a different cost structure. For example,
it would make no sense to ﬂy cross country to close a $10/month deal. This
means that to be sustainable requires that we map the right GTM motion to the
revenue generated by the customer over time.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

1.3.3

Matching Products with GTM Motions
Just as a company can have multiple products each generating its own
revenue stream, a single product can have multiple GTM motions, also with
their own revenue stream (see Figure 1.9). For example:
●

Scenario 1: A product-led growth (PLG) product employs an inbound
motion to attract pro-users, generating leads through content marketing.

●

Scenario 2: A single product utilizes 3 separate GTM motions. For
example, an inbound motion is in place for targeting SMB accounts, a
ﬁeld sales team focuses on Enterprise accounts, and a dedicated team
caters to a select few strategic accounts.

●

Scenario 3: Three distinct products are each aligned with their own
GTM motion. For instance, Product A targets pro-users through an
inbound motion. Product B aims at the SMB market using an outbound
motion. Finally, Product C focuses on the Enterprise sector, employing a
ﬁeld sales motion.

By understanding different GTM motions and scenarios, businesses can
strategize on varied paths to growth. Some GTM motions might be slower
but generate substantial recurring revenue, like the Enterprise GTM motion.
Others might offer a much higher deal volume but come at a lower ACV.

FIGURE 1.9

Different products and GTM motions each can create different revenue streams.

SCENARIO 1

SCENARIO 2

SCENARIO 3

One product,
one GTM motion.

One product,
multiple GTM motions.

Multiple products, each with
their own GTM motion.

Product

Product
ARR A
GTM motion A
ARR

GTM motion

ARR A
Product A

GTM motion A

Product B

GTM motion B

Product C

GTM motion C

ARR B
GTM motion B

ARR B

ARR C
GTM motion C

ARR C

22

1.3.4

Cost of a GTM Motion
A crucial aspect of different GTM motions is aligning the cost with the revenue
it generates. For instance, if you sell a multimillion-dollar solution, you can't
expect customers to purchase it by watching a demo video and presenting
their credit card information; they will want to engage with multiple specialists
and stakeholders.
Conversely, if you sell a $5/month subscription, customers don't expect an
on-site visit. Actually, they will probably prefer to watch a video and enter their
credit card information in a self-serve portal. In essence, the cost of the GTM
motion must be aligned with the recurring revenue it produces.
From 2018 to 2021, we witnessed a signiﬁcant increase in the cost of GTM
motions (see Figure 1.10). The 2022 SaaS market crash was caused by
companies paying twice as much for GTM motions.

FIGURE 1.10

From 2018 to 2024, we observed a signiﬁcant rise in the cost of GTM motions. In some
instances, the mid-touch approach, utilizing 2 junior sellers (SDR and a Jr. AE), even
became more costly than a high-touch approach relying on a single seller (Sr. AE).

Cost of Leads

Compensation

2018

No Touch

2024

Low Touch
Large increase in cost due
to impact of ineﬃciencies.

Mid Touch

High Touch

Dedicated
$0

$200,000

$400,000

Cost of Marketing, Sales, and Customer Success

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

$600,000

The Need for Sustainable GTM Motions
Creating a sustainable business relies on implementing cost-effective GTM
motion anchored in proven, repeatable processes. This requires utilizing
technology for more affordable task execution or hiring individuals at standard
wages for routine tasks, instead of depending on scarce, exceptionally skilled,
and highly paid talent.
THE RISING COST OF THE OUTBOUND MOTION
The surge in demand for subscription-based services has fueled the rapid
expansion of SaaS companies, skyrocketing from approximately 1,000 in
2011 to a staggering 35,000 by 2023. These companies have adopted
similar GTM motions, often with the assistance of popular technology.
For example, between 2015 and 2020, the outbound GTM motion
featuring an inside sales team emerged as the preferred approach. This
strategy leveraged cutting-edge email hyper-personalization and
sequencing technologies. However, as automation increased
production, the success rate of outbound emails declined.
In 2015, it took over 100 cold outbound emails to generate a single
opportunity. By 2018, this number had risen to 200 cold outbound
attempts, including emails, calls, and social interactions. In 2023, it
had surged over 1,000 cold outbound attempts to generate one
opportunity.
This created an insatiable thirst for leads to call on, resulting in soaring
lead acquisition costs. But it didn't stop there. It generated a demand for
more salespeople to send out more emails, which drove up salaries. For
instance, entry-level Sales Development Representative (SDR) positions,
which had a starting annual salary of around $35,000 in 2015, had
climbed to $55,000 by 2018. By 2023, the target earnings for a US-based
SDR reached $80,586, according to ZipRecruiter reports.
This led to the cost of outbound doubling from 2018 to 2023.

24

1.3.5

The Problem Only Got Worse
Several years after the crash, the SaaS industry is still struggling to ﬁnd scalable
and sustainable GTM motions. This challenge is evident in the trend of Sales and
Marketing costs as a percentage of newly acquired revenue, depicted in Figure
1.11. Despite initial cost reductions due to workforce downsizing, the expenses
subsequently increased. By the end of 2023, the cost of acquisition had
worsened to 1.5 times the severity observed at the outset of the crash. The issue
stems from the industry's failure to adapt their GTM motions in the years that
followed the crash.

FIGURE 1.11

Cost of Acquisition and Expansion depicts that the GTM problem is not solved.

of net new ARR

of total ARR

The trend toward cost reduction and Free Cash Flow (FCF) generation, especially
among venture-backed companies, led to the continuation of ineﬃcient practices.
The widespread availability of AI tools exacerbated the problem by enabling
startups to continue their aggressive "Grow at all costs" strategies at a lower cost.
While a healthy focus on FCF is generally prudent, a lack of operational capability
to apply this to GTM motions led to a decline in growth. This phenomenon was
reported by David Spitz from Benchsights who looked at the data from publicly
listed SaaS companies. It revealed a decline in average growth rate from 36% to
18%, effectively halving it (see Figure 1.12).

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

FIGURE 1.12

The decline in average growth rate and increase of FCF among public SaaS companies.

Growth rate
FCF margin

The combination of the decline in growth rate, and the increase in cost of
acquisition tell us that the GTM challenges faced by late-stage startups and
scaleups are worsening. These challenges can often be traced back to lack of
knowledge and expertise in revenue architecture. The teams that operate the
recurring revenue machine, commonly do not understand how it works. Thus,
it's reasonable to predict that a sustainable GTM strategy will become a key
success differentiator for venture-backed companies in the coming years, and
that Revenue Architecture will play an important role.

1.3.6

Navigating Growth Stages
A high-velocity organization undergoes various stages of growth in a relatively
short time frame. What an average company accomplishes in 40 years, a
hypergrowth subscription-based company achieves in about 10 years—4 times
faster—by progressing through a series of growth stages and critical milestones.
Growth stages
Growth stages in SaaS mark a ﬁrm's maturation and business evolution. Each
stage comes with unique challenges, objectives, and key performance indicators.

26

For simplicity, we will keep it to 3 growth stages here:
● Startup Stage: In this initial phase, SaaS startups aim to validate their
product–market ﬁt by acquiring the ﬁrst set of customers willing to pay
for the product. That makes the product the star of the show, and rightly
so. However, once they have validated the product and gained traction,
the focus shifts from having a great product to selling it at scale.
● Scaleup Stage: SaaS companies in the Scaleup stage focus on rapid
growth, expanding revenue from $10 million to $500 million, by launching
multiple GTM motions and optimizing each GTM motion for proﬁtability.
● Grownup Stage: Representing maturity, SaaS companies shift their focus
entirely to proﬁtability, operational eﬃciency, adhering to metrics related to
publicly traded companies.
From initial ideation and securing ﬁrst customers to scaling operations and
optimizing for proﬁtability across GTM motions, understanding these stages
helps SaaS businesses allocate resources effectively, target the right customer
segments, and implement growth strategies tailored to their current phase.
Critical Milestones
In the SaaS industry, success hinges on a few critical milestones:
● Product-Market Fit (PMF) ensures that the software isn't just another
product; it means it addresses a genuine market need, and different
customers are willing to pay for it, often indicated by reaching $1M in ARR.
● Go-To-Market Fit (GTMF) focuses on how you effectively bring your
product to the masses. It's not only about the value your software offers
but also how you present, and deliver that value.
Achieving PMF means you have created a product that customers ﬁnd
valuable enough to pay for. GTMF, on the other hand, ensures this product is
presented to, and reaches the right audience, eﬃciently. True GTMF goes
beyond consistently hitting growth targets by acquiring new customers; it
involves reliably delivering value to customers, thus fostering retention and
enhancing lifetime value for both the seller and the buyer. Typically, reaching
true GTMF is a process that spans years – and for good reason.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

● Going IPO by offering shares to the general public allows a company to raise
substantial capital from external investors, enabling further expansion and
growth. Going public also brings increased scrutiny, regulatory compliance,
and transparency requirements. It's worth noting that not all successful SaaS
companies go public; some opt for acquisitions or other forms of exit.
● Fortune 2000 reﬂects a company has achieved over $5B in revenue, and is
seen as a major accomplishment in the business world.
This requires a signiﬁcant shift in focus as the company matures, moving from a
product-centric approach to emphasizing GTM-centric approach. This shift is
referred to as a Phase Shift, a topic we will delve into next.

The importance of GTM grows signiﬁcantly as a company evolves from a Startup into a
Scaleup. This transformation requires a company to make drastic changes.

PHASE SHIFT

IMPORTANCE

FIGURE 1.13

PHASE SHIFT

Product

Product
Product
GTM
GTM

PMF

STARTUP

Strategy

Strategy

GTM
GTMF

SCALEUP

IPO

GROWNUP

F2000

In summary: A successful recurring revenue factory depends on multiple scalable
and sustainable GTM motions, which cover all customer-facing roles. The GTM
motions are tailored to align with buyers' purchasing preferences, ranging from
the Low Touch motion used for inbound businesses to the High Touch motion
used for enterprise sales. Ideally, each GTM motion should achieve sustainability
before hitting $10M in ARR.

28

1.4

PHASE SHIFTING
Think of the 3 growth stages mentioned earlier (see Figure 1.13) as akin to the
educational system, where you ﬁrst attend elementary school, then move on to
high school, followed by college. The progression through growth stages is
similar to progressing through school, where each school prepares you for the
next one. Each school is different, very different; consider the difference
between college and high school for example. This reﬂects how different each
growth stage is. And each school has a clear end to it—a graduation.
Schooling vs. Scaling
Unlike the educational system, where you know when you graduate, the
transitions between growth stages are less deﬁned. In many cases, one
growth stage ﬂows seamlessly into another; this is referred to as a phase
shift. For example, the transition from Startup to Scaleup represents a
phase shift, but there are many others:
● From founder-led to sales-led growth.
● From grow at all costs to sustainable growth.
● From a people-centric to a process-centric culture.
● From a SMB to an Enterprise GTM motion.
● From domestic to international growth.
● From a single product to a product portfolio.
● From non-GAAP to GAAP compliance.
● From a private to a public company (IPO)
These are just a few examples of phase shifts a company experiences. While in
the educational system, people "phase shift" from one school to the next every 4
to 6 years, hypergrowth companies experience multiple phase shifts, often 2 to
3 simultaneously, over the span of a few years. Each growth stage requires a
different set of strategies, a new set of metrics, involves new

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

leadership, different systems, demands more advanced processes, and so on.
This explains why phase shifts can take time, on average, around 18 months,
making them a signiﬁcant undertaking that demands the full attention of the
CEO and careful planning by those involved on the executive team.

FIGURE 1.14

Phase Shifts deﬁne the Startup, Scaleup, and Grownup growth stages.

$5M

$10M

$20M

$50M

$100M

$200M

$500M

$1B

Founder-led.
Scalability.
Sustainability.
Multi-product.
GAAP Compliance.
IPO.
Productivity.
STARTUP

SCALEUP

GROWNUP

Executives are aware of most of these phase shifts, but they are unaware of the
process of a phase shift, so they spend most of their time reacting to the effects
of past phase shifts rather than preparing for the next one. The presence of
departmental silos and the constant turnover of staff only make this more
daunting. Perhaps this helps explain why the grow-at-all-costs mindset has
endured for such an extended period, while we all knew it no longer worked. It’s
just so much more convenient to continue with the status quo.
In summary: Revenue Architecture, as a discipline, establishes the scientiﬁc
foundation for Recurring Revenue growth and serves as a linchpin in driving
these transformative phase shifts, in particular those involving GTM motions.
Through a series of models, it not only educates but also guide companies on
their growth journey, It helps them to proactively prepare for phase shifts, rather
than merely reacting to them.

30

1.5

RECAP
The Golden Era of SaaS, which spanned from 2011 to late 2021, was marked by
remarkable growth and innovation. However, its abrupt end in early 2022 can be
attributed to the unsustainable grow-at-all-costs approach that had become the
norm. This resulted in companies going public prematurely, often with
insuﬃcient revenue, while relying on immature Sales and Marketing strategies.
Although a shift to a sustainable approach is essential, it alone will not address
the operational growth challenges, and when applied incorrectly it is likely to
have adverse effects that focusing on cost reduction often leads to a decline in
product quality. The product quality in a recurring revenue business is what
leads to renewals.
To tackle these challenges, we are introducing a simple concept: To operate a
recurring revenue business as if it were a factory, a Recurring Revenue Factory,
and see each GTM motion as a production line. This approach draws inspiration
from the best practices from the industrial revolution, and it customizes them to
suit to the distinctive needs of recurring revenue businesses.

Table 1.1

The 3 main goals of a recurring revenue factory, mapped to maturity phases.

Factory
Goal

Recurring Revenue
Factory

Operational
Directive

Maturity
Phase

Production

Accelerate Growth

Implement proven processes

Scalability

Eﬃciency

Lower Cost

Apply unit economics (cost)

Sustainability

Quality

Deliver Recurring Impact

Instill quality management

Durability

The main goal of the Revenue Factory is clear: to establish recurring revenue
growth. This goal centers on delivering what causes recurring revenue, recurring
impact. This requires a customer-centric approach that covers the entire
customer journey.

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

The shift in perspective requires that organizations break away from their
traditional departmental approach, silos, and instead develop cross-functional
collaboration.
Central to this transformation is the GTM approach that brings together all
functions that call on a customer under a GTM motion. We identiﬁed 5 speciﬁc
GTM motions: No Touch, Low Touch, Medium Touch, High Touch, and Dedicated
Touch. These motions offer ﬂexibility to tailor to different business models and
customer needs. Implementing such a transformative change is not without
challenges and takes time, typically requiring an 18-month phase shift.

The importance of GTM grows signiﬁcantly as a company evolves from a Startup into a
Scaleup. This transformation requires a phase shift.

PHASE SHIFT

IMPORTANCE

FIGURE 1.15

PHASE SHIFT

Product

Product
Product
GTM
GTM

PMF

STARTUP

Strategy

Strategy

GTM
GTMF

SCALEUP

IPO

GROWNUP

F2000

In summary: The Revenue Factory emerges in response to the 2022 market
crash, aiming to establish recurring revenue through recurring impact. This
objective hinges on cross-functional collaboration, the adoption of a GTM
approach, and the strategic use of GTM motions. Revenue Architecture
provides a guiding framework to design, build, and operate a successful
recurring revenue factory based on GTM motions.

32

WHAT IS NEXT?
Just as an architect meticulously designs a bridge to ensure its longevity, stability,
and eﬃciency through the use of proven frameworks, Revenue Architecture uses a
series of established frameworks. This is vital to achieve the same level of rigor in
designing, building, and deploying a revenue factory.
● Part I. Fundamentals: This section covers the scientiﬁc frameworks upon
which a recurring revenue factory is based, including First Principles, Models
& Data, and Systems & Processes.
● Part II. Design: Here, we explore the design of a recurring revenue factory,
which is based on a series of frameworks that form a foundation. This
includes The Revenue Model, The Data Model, and The Mathematical Model.
● Part III. Build: To build the factory, more frameworks are utilized, designed to
enable a business to adapt to frequent market changes. These are The
Operating Model, The Growth Model, and The Go-to-Market Model.
● Part IV. Deploy: For most organizations, adopting a scientiﬁc approach does
not come naturally. It requires guidance on operating it with an emphasis on
continuous and iterative improvement.
Let's begin by exploring the fundamentals upon which a recurring revenue
factory is based, as this understanding is crucial for the successful operation
of a recurring revenue business.

GET THE BOOK

CHAPTER 01 | INTRODUCTION

