How to Make
a Go-to-Market
Methodology
Stick.

Dave Boyce and Dominique Levin (Winning by Design)
In collaboration with Winning by Design Customer Advisory Board:
Ian Westbrook (DocuSign)
Panos Maintanis (TalkWalker)
Rachael Smith (Dropbox)
Chuck Marcouiller (FreightWaves)

Stacey Justice (HashiCorp)
Sarah Houlihan (Clari)
Jill Guardia (Thought Industries)
Julien Cerutti (Meltwater)

Ashton Williams (Slack)
Sonja Damerval (Kandji)
Gail Behun (JuniperSquare)
Tom Cheriyan (Rattle)

June 2023

of 16

PART ONE:
HOW TO PICK A GTM METHODOLOGY
So you want to optimize your go-to-market?

measured, right?

Perhaps you feel your sales team could be more
efﬁcient?

Yes and no.

Maybe you believe sales needs to be trained in
this methodology or that?
Perhaps you had great success with a
methodology in the past, and you know if you
could get a methodology installed in your
current company, it would up everyone’s game
and improve results.
If you’ve had positive experiences in the past
running a sales methodology, you are likely to
lean toward that methodology again, but you’re
also aware of the old adage:

“The best methodology is the one that
gets adopted.”
So does it really matter which methodology you
choose? As long as it’s being followed/tracked/

Yes - It’s important that your sales organization
all operates from the same playbook. And in that
sense, any methodology is better than no
methodology.
But No – which methodology really does matter.
It depends what you are trying to accomplish.
And a methodology is just part of the answer. If
what you are looking for is consistency and
effectiveness across the entire revenue
organization, what you need is not a sales
methodology, but a GTM methodology. And if
you want all those activities to sync to a
backbone of consistent metrics, and a holistic
growth model that contemplates demand
generation and acquisition and activation and
retention and growth loops – what you really
need is a Revenue Operating Model.

Sales Methodology
Go-to-Market Methodology
Revenue Operating Model
Go-To-Market (GTM) Methodology vs. Operating Model
Beyond $10M in Annual Recurring Revenue, a
revenue organization operates as a factory. The
Go To Market (GTM) team consists of Product,
Marketing, Sales, and Customer Success, who
work together to produce revenue.
In physical manufacturing, Kaizen, Six Sigma,
and Lean Manufacturing are methodologies
designed to increase the quantity and quality of
production, while reducing cost.

In our GTM factory, we want to increase
revenue, improve customer outcomes, and
decrease costs.
The objectives are the same, so where is the
Kaizen for GTM?
●

A Methodology deﬁnes how a GTM team
member behaves: contextual awareness,
skills, process

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

2 of 16

PART ONE

●

An Operating Model deﬁnes the
parameters of the system within which
these GTM team members work.

The Revenue Operating Model lays out the
processes and mathematical principles that
underpin the quantity, quality and cost of revenue
production.
●

How do your customers prefer to buy?

●

How can you organize to serve them?

●

What processes are best employed to
maximize revenue and impact while
minimizing cost?

Part of deﬁning your Revenue Operating Model is
picking your GTM motion(s). This is highly
speciﬁc and dependent on the needs of your
speciﬁc market. For instance:
➔

An outbound GTM model would be the
exact wrong choice for a low-price,
self-service product

➔

A product-led-growth GTM model
would be perfectly wrong for complex,
bespoke solutions

And whatever model you choose, it needs to be
deﬁned and executed as a set of consistent
processes, relying on common language, a
measurement structure that allows you to
monitor what is within tolerance, and what
needs to be addressed, and a system for
addressing issues that arise.
The process-driven organization does not
assign blame or credit to individual humans. If
something goes right, it is (hopefully) due to a
successful execution of process. If something
fails, either the process is wrong, or it was
poorly executed.
A GTM Methodology, combined with a Revenue
Operating model, provide the framework for
establishing a process culture and an
architected revenue machine.

Figure 1. A comprehensive Revenue Operating Model goes beyond skills training to deﬁne your data model,
process, tools, enablement, and perhaps even organization and compensation design.

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

3 of 16

PART ONE

How to Pick the Right GTM Methodology for Your Business
You’re convinced you need a
GTM Methodology, and you
want to ensure you choose one
suited to your business.
All methodologies typically
include:
➔

Common language
(diagnostic framework,
customer impact)

➔

Coaching framework
(knowledge, skills,
certiﬁcation)

➔

Ability to codify into
CRM (real-timecoaching, turn-by-turn
directions)

But beyond that, the details of the methodology matter.
Questions to ask yourself include:
1.

Does this methodology make it easy for customers to
buy from you?

2.

Is this methodology relevant for all Go To Market teams
(marketing, sales, customer success)?

3.

Is this methodology customer-centric: focused on
achieving customer impact, rather than merely
qualifying deals?

4.

Is this methodology ﬂexible enough to incorporate
things already working well within your organization?

5.

Is this methodology easy to measure within the systems
you already have? Can it be integrated into your tech
stack beyond CRM (e.g., sales engagement, CS
management, and conversational intelligence)?

6.

Can you continue to evolve and build on this
methodology independently without incurring ongoing
licensing fees?

7.

What is the methodology activation plan for executives,
frontline managers, and individual contributors? (see
the next section for more on that)

8.

What enablement materials are available to provide reps
turn-by-turn directions on how to implement the
required process and skills?

“

“We’re creating a Revenue Architecture and a consistent, common language throughout
the entire customer journey. I foresee a day when the BDR organization shapes the
experience from the beginning, and that same experience runs all the way to a CS consult,
transforming what we're doing in terms of CS operations.”
- Julien Cerutti, Meltwater

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

4 of 16

PART ONE

Leadership Alignment
Sometimes we mistakenly believe that whoever
holds the budget for implementing a
methodology also holds the responsibility for
ensuring success. That’s a logical conclusion,
but it assumes too much of one leader. One
leader cannot succeed in a GTM transformation
without alignment across the entire
organization.

Question: Where does the budget live for
implementing a GTM methodology or GTM
Operating Model?
Answer: That’s not the operative question. No
matter who controls the budget, we need to
align all stakeholders.

Yes you need budget, but even more than that,
you need alignment. Let’s say the budget lives
with Enablement. Does that mean Enablement
can run this project independently and ensure
success?
No.

What if the budget lives with Revenue Operations?
Also no.
What if your company has one of these fancy
new titles like, “Director of Revenue Enablement,
Strategy and Operations,” and what if all revenue
support functions report there?
Still no.
At a recent gathering of the Winning by Design
Customer Advisory Board, the consensus opinion
was clear:
Leadership alignment is required both when
choosing a GTM methodology and especially
when implementing. The group speciﬁcally called
out alignment across 3 levels of leadership:
1.

Executive Leadership (C-level)

2.

Sales Leadership (VP-level)

3.

Front-line management

Involve enough of your leadership in the
methodology selection to send the signal that
this is non-optional.

“

“I feel like we underestimate executives in this. Your executives are who make it
‘promotable work.’ They say, ‘this is our way.’ They make it a matter of company pride to
follow global standards.”
- Ashton Williams, Slack

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

5 of 16

PART TWO:
HOW TO ENSURE YOUR METHODOLOGY STICKS
Higher adoption leads to better results.
But higher adoption is a function of the
activation plan. So what is your activation plan?
If you plan to simply roll out your new
methodology in waves of training across your
organization – accompanied by certiﬁcation – it
likely does not matter what methodology you
choose.
Why?

The best reps will pay attention, remember
what they were taught, and make
permanent adjustments to their approach
that incorporate the parts of the new
methodology that resonate.
Middle-of-the-pack reps will forget soon.
And your lowest performers will look to get
the checkmark of having participated in
training, then go back to what they were
doing.

Because it won’t stick.

Training alone does not work, it does not stick, and it does
not affect change in a way that is transformational.

Design

Activate

Operate

1. Leadership
Alignment

4.

Speed Team /
Pilot Team

7. Ongoing
Measurement

2. Impact Metrics &
Leading Indicators

5.

“Pull” Marketing

6.

Phased Rollout:
Impact Sprints

8. Culture of
Coaching

3. Baselining

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

9. Operationalized
Enablement

6 of 16

PART TWO

Design

1. Leadership Alignment

“

“If you don't have the senior leaders who actually go through the training and are willing
to inspect using the language of that methodology, it will fail every time.”
- Chuck Marcouiller, Freightwaves

An investment in a GTM Methodology is
expensive. Investing in a GTM Operating Model
is even more so.

One way to ensure failure is to not have
alignment and support from leadership.

And the most expensive investment you make is
not measured in money – it’s measured in time
and attention.

If a rep walks out of training where they learned
X and into a review with their manager where
she hears Y, what do you think she will do? Y.
Every time.

One thing is sure: if you roll out a new
methodology across your teams, they will invest
hundreds or thousands of hours in classrooms,
workshops, and roleplays.

Our Customer Advisory Board feels that
Leadership Alignment is so critically important,
they are willing to stop a project until alignment
can be secured.

Now the question is whether that will make any
difference?

“

“We did a go-to-market analysis that included a lot of input from reps and teams and
front-line managers. But as we began to deﬁne the process, we took it out of committee and
put the onus on the senior sales leadership team. Through this process they became
accountable, and now they're bought into what we're rolling out, which to me is really key.”
- Stacey Justice, HashiCorp

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

7 of 16

PART TWO

Design

2. Impact Metrics & Leading Indicators

If we are to see results from the roll out of a
GTM methodology, leaders must align on goals.
Ideally we would pick an initial metric to focus
on. For example, the goal of the initial
methodology roll-out could be to increase rep
productivity by increasing the close rate or by
decreasing the discount rate.
Note: It doesn’t matter as much which metric you
pick as long as you focus on one or two at most
per team. If you’re trying to master tennis, you
cannot improve your serve, forehand, backhand,
and smash - or your swing, grip, and stance all at
the same time. Aim small, miss small.

to improve “Impact Metrics.” Some good
examples of GTM Impact Metrics would be:
➔
➔

Improve discount rate
Improve qualiﬁcation by raising
conversion rate from MQL to SQL (CR3)

Impact Metrics are targeted enough to isolate
and measure, but with sales cycles being what
they are, improvements in Impact Metrics may
not be visible for weeks or months. What
improvements can we see sooner?
Leading Indicators correlate with Impact
Metrics, but they are easier and faster to
measure and improve.

We call these targeted outcomes you are trying

Ideally we want to see Leading Indicators improve from day-to-day and week-to-week. At a minimum
within 90 days we should see improvements in Leading Indicators, which–if we chose them correctly–will
directly correlate with Impact Metrics.

Leading Indicators
Impact Metrics

90 days

Whether you adopt standard deﬁnitions provided by Winning by Design or create your own, step one is to
choose the metrics you want to impact, deﬁne them, and write down the deﬁnitions.

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

8 of 16

PART TWO

Design

3. Baselining

Now that you have deﬁned your Impact Metrics
and Leading Indicators, it’s time to baseline.

growing or shrinking teams and for fewer or
more effective work days in any given period.

Baselining is best done on a trailing 90-day
basis, team by team.

For rate-based metrics (%), no such
normalization is required – as long as the
deﬁnition remains consistent, you can compare
across periods within the same motion,
regardless of ﬂuctuations in team composition.

For volume metrics, you will want to normalize
output on a per-rep-period basis to account for

Activate

4. Speed Team

As soon as is practical, name a pilot team (we
call it a Speed Team) to be the ﬁrst to adopt the
Methodology and post results; this pays huge
dividends.

on the robustness of the manager and the team
members. The ideal Speed Team is not afraid of
new things, and their challenge is threefold:
1.

Iron out the kinks: ﬁnd ways to improve
and perfect the application of the
methodology to your speciﬁc market
and customers

2.

Show what good looks like: post metrics
that exceed baseline and set a bar for
the rest of the company

3.

Establish themselves as experts:
become a resource for the rest of the
team who comes after

A Speed Team is one manager and 6-10 reps, all
running a single motion in a single segment.
The Speed Team will admittedly be stepping out
in front of the rest of the teams – perhaps even
before processes (Playbooks) are fully designed.
This is not a problem.
Why? Because we choose a Speed Team based

Activate

5. “Pull” Marketing

Early results from a Speed Team are always
good. Always.
Really?
Yes. Because a) we chose the right team with
the right manager, b) we challenged them, and
c) we gave them excellent resources to adopt
and apply the Methodology.
As good metrics begin accumulating, we
publicize the experience and results of the
Speed Team to other teams awaiting the

Methodology. Speed Team members become a
sounding board and coaching resource for
teams who subsequently onboard to the new
methodology. And whereas the baseline is the
“thing to beat,” the fact that the Speed Team is
already beating the baseline becomes all the
more motivating for subsequent teams.
This is called “Pull” marketing as opposed to
traditional “Push” rollouts, because in this
environment, teams look forward to receiving
the goodness their predecessors already got.

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

9 of 16

PART TWO

Activate

6. Phased Rollout: Impact Sprints

At this point we have:
➔
➔
➔
➔
➔

Leadership Alignment
Metrics Deﬁnitions
Baseline performance
Speed Team results (what good looks like)
Teams waiting to adopt

With all that in place, what could possibly go
wrong?
You’d be surprised.
Don’t blow this.

“An amateur practices until they get it
right; a professional practices until they
can’t get it wrong.”
If you’ve executed well to this point, you have

anxious / eager reps, front-line managers, and
leadership all calling out to speed things up.

“What’s stopping us from just rolling out
the whole methodology? We have it
designed, right? Just train the crew and let
the managers handle the reinforcement.”
That’s the right idea, but no. Managers do need
to handle the reinforcement (more on that in the
next section). But the question is – how much can
reasonably be understood, practiced, inspected,
improved, and measured at once?
Answer: you know the answer.
Humans are humans, and we learn how we learn.
Kandji handled this problem by breaking down
their transformation into chunks.

“

“We broke our Playbook into monthly chunks that we use for ongoing enablement for
existing reps. We train fundamental skills on Thursdays and do rolling certiﬁcations.
Managers are informed who opts in, the skills are reinforced by sales management in a
‘Study Hall’ on Fridays, and then reinforced in their team meetings on Tuesdays.”
- Sonja Damerval, Kandji

At Clari, they felt instinctively that although they need a complete methodology, they want to deliver these
skills to their reps in digestible pieces:

“

“There are speciﬁc things we want to enhance from a skill standpoint. We want to focus on
discovery. We want to focus on negotiating. We want to bring more value into all of our
deals. And we really appreciated that we could diagnose speciﬁc pain points for ourselves
and bring in someone to help address those things.”
- Sarah Houlihan, Clari

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

10 of 16

PART TWO

Activate

6. Phased Rollout: Impact Sprints - Continued

Freightwaves has been taking one Impact Metric at a time, starting with the worst-performing parts of their
selling process, based on rep conversion data compared with industry standards.

First they took on discovery. By introducing a
best-in-class methodology around discovering
Situation, Pain and Impact, Freightwaves tripled
conversion rates from discovery to demo.

Next they took on discounting – swapping out the
historical practice of “discounting to get the deal”
for “trading something of value.” The overall
discount rate fell signiﬁcantly, with one of their
strongest performing reps lowering average
discount from 52% to 17%.

3X

Discount Rates

52%

discovery

17%

demo

Across example after example of successful transformations, we have seen the pattern of designing big, rolling
out small. Establish the Operating Model, train two skills at a time.
Having studied these patterns of success, Winning by Design has developed a system of phased rollout based on
what we call an “Impact Sprint.”
An Impact Sprint is a focused effort on one or two skills with associated Impact Metrics and Leading Indicators.
It involves teaching, demonstrating, practicing, role-playing, and ongoing measurement and coaching.

t
fec

t
fec

per

per
ice

ct
pra

ice

ct
pra

skill

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

11 of 16

PART TWO

Operate

7. Ongoing Measurement (Impact Ofﬁce)

For a new methodology to create lasting
change, ongoing measurement of the Impact
Metrics and Leading Indicators is required.
Ideally, each manager knows her team’s metrics,
manages to them, and coaches to them –
leveraging the system she inherited.

But the effort is not only about measurement
and reporting – it is also about triaging things
that surface as “out of tolerance.” Much like the
manufacturing system of Six Sigma, this effort is
a way to spot what is not working as expected,
and aim attention and effort there, to bring the
revenue factory back up to full potential.

“

“Understanding both the adoption of a GTM Methodology and its impact on
the business is critical. One way to achieve this is to instrument and measure
the “completeness” of SPICED ﬁelds in your CRM. By correlating these
metrics with both win rate and deal size, you can gain valuable insights on
the correlation of methodology adoption and business impact.”
- Ian Westbrook, DocuSign

➔

Talkwalker has implemented SPICED in Salesforce, in all
internal and external case studies, throughout Gong using
trackers, and in all internal win announcements.

➔

Freightwaves measurements lift each time they focus on an
Impact Metric. As these metrics improve, they measure the
resulting compound impact on growth.

➔

HashiCorp maintains a Productivity Council for revenue,
where all improvements in Impact Metrics are reported. In
terms of Leading Indicators, HashiCorp is also working
with Gong on a SPICED integration that will not only score
calls based on the methodology, but also insert evidence of
SPICED into Salesforce.

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

Ongoing measurement
requires metrics to be
codiﬁed in systems and
summarized on an ongoing
basis. We call this approach
an Impact Ofﬁce, and our
recommended minimum
frequency for executives to
engage with the Impact
Metrics is quarterly.

12 of 16

PART TWO

Operate

8. Culture of Coaching

The key to any change program is front-line
managers.
The managers must believe.
They must know the Methodology better than
the reps.
They must be willing to dive into deal reviews,
process inspection, and skills assessment, using
the language and structure of the Methodology.

“

“Our focus has been entirely on our
frontline managers. The objective is
to operationalize and make sure
this effort is really sticky.”
- Gail Behun, JuniperSquare

Managers must be able to inspect, coach, and
inspire – all the while reinforcing the chosen
Methodology and metrics. They must be able to
diagnose issues by assessing an individual’s
Results, determining whether the rep is lacking
in Effort, Knowledge, or Skill, and then have the
coaching tools to work with the rep to improve.
Reps don’t need managers. They need coaches.

“

“Most of our reps have been trained
and understand all the bits and
pieces. But now they need coaching.
We are now focusing all our efforts
on leadership alignment to establish
a coaching culture.”
- Jill Guardia, Thought Industries

Operate

9. Operationalized Enablement

Not every rep will remember and implement the
elements of your new GTM Methodology. In
fact, most will forget the majority of the training
once it is over.

Coaching is one solution, but it is not foolproof.
So how does this become more foolproof?
Operationalization.

“

“Creating an ecosystem where the GTM Methodology is fully and accurately represented in
all aspects of the sellers ecosystem is key. For example, ensuring all relevant Enablement
content, sales tech stack experiences and performance management reports align to the
core principles of the GTM Methodology helps ensure/reinforce adoption. By taking
meaningful steps in this area, all sellers, managers, enablers and operators are effectively
"living and breathing" the methodology in what they see, hear and leverage on a daily basis.”
- Ian Westbrook, DocuSign

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

13 of 16

PART TWO

Operate

9. Operationalized Enablement - Continued

Some options for operationalization follow:
●

●

Standardization: As mentioned above,
DocuSign and Talkwalker have both
implemented SPICED as a standard set
of ﬁelds in Salesforce, allowing for a
consistent way of inspecting and
measuring rep compliance with the
methodology and overall deal health
Automation: Many technology
companies have incorporated SPICED
and the Winning by Design Bowtie into
their platforms in such a way that it is
“automatic” to follow the methodology
with this enabled:
○ Winn.ai prompts reps during
discovery calls with suggested
SPICED questions, then listens to
the call, automatically picks out
SPICED language, and populates
the language into conﬁgured
Salesforce ﬁelds on the opportunity
○ Gong has released a beta version of
“trackers,” conﬁgured to SPICED,
whereby it can listen for and log
indicators of SPICED into
Salesforce automatically
○ Catalyst has implemented the
Bowtie into its standard system for
managing customer engagement
post-initial sale

BenchSights has standardized on
the Bowtie as its data model for
benchmarking GTM motions across
the industry
Mandate: Some companies mandate the
completion of SPICED ﬁelds for an
opportunity to progress through the
funnel:
○ Slack has standardized all deal
reviews to include aspects of the
SPICED methodology. This makes
deals inspectable and measurable
consistently across teams.
○ Thought Industries has also
standardized all deal reviews using
the SPICED methodology, making
inspection and measurement easy.
Just-in-time Enablement: The concept
of just-in-time help / enablement is
becoming more popular
○ Rattle has deployed in-app
guidance within their CRM. This
surfaces the right resources at the
right time, depending on triggers
within CRM. For instance, if a
$six-ﬁgure deal enters the proposal
stage, the rep is presented with a
video on “Trade vs. Negotiation” to
remind them of the skill that is
relevant
○

●

●

These approaches bring the contents of the methodology right to the point of decision / action, so reps
are not required to a) remember or b) look up the relevant skills as they are needed as they work with
their customers.
We believe operationalization will become more and more popular as Methodologies become more and
more embedded into how GTM teams operate.

Do we really need an approach this comprehensive?
No… only if you want results, and only if you want them to stick.
It’s like Mom used to say: “Only brush the teeth you want to keep.”

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

14 of 16

SUMMARY

“

“If you don’t know where you’re going, any road will get you there.”
- Lewis Carroll

In today’s environment of sustainable growth, it is
important to architect your growth by design.
Each piece of the revenue factory produces
important inputs for the next piece, and marginal
gains across the entire process can compound to
produce impressive – even transformational –
results.
Not all methodologies are as ambitious as to take
on the problem of growth.
Not all methodologies are built to ﬁt within a
Revenue Operating Model.
Rolling out a holistic GTM Methodology (or
Operating Model) is ambitious, but remember:
1.

2.
3.

Training on “any” methodology will get you
consistency and certiﬁed personnel, but it
may not get you results.
Hit-and-run training will produce impact
that is momentary at best.
Choosing a sales methodology (versus a full
GTM Methodology) may improve the Sales
portion of the revenue machine, but it may
create disconnect with the Customer
Success portion.

Collectively, we believe in the Revenue
Architecture approach to
transformation. We believe a Revenue
Operating Model, a deﬁned set of
processes, an agreed-upon set of
metrics, ongoing measurement and
tuning, and a culture of coaching are a
responsible way of approaching a
transformation.
Conversely, we believe hit-and-run
approaches to training get you
checks-in-the-boxes, but no lasting
change.
It is our experience this can be done.
Growth can be architected and
managed according to that
architecture.

Go, ﬁght, win!
- Dave, Dominique, and the entire
WbD Customer Advisory Board

How to Make a Go-to-Market Methodology Stick.

15 of 16

of 16

