BLUEPRINT.

How to Create an Ideal Customer Proﬁle
(ICP) & Segmentation
CUSTOMER MODELING
In this process, we look at
existing customers to learn
which ones we want to have
more of. We look at what
they have in common to help
us target new accounts based
on this ideal customer
proﬁle.

STEP 5.5
Document ICP attributes
and Top Segments

ANALYSIS
STEP...2
Conduct quantitative
analysis to determine
what factors these
customers have in
common

Conduct qualitative
analysis of key
insights

STEP ...1

STEP...4

Diagnose using
SPICED to
highlight and
guide deeper
analysis

Use data and
insights to uncover
the ideal customer
proﬁle

CUSTOMERS

STEP...3

T1

T2

T3

S ituation

Yes

Yes

Yes

P ain

Yes

Yes

I mpact Potential

Likely

C ritical E vent

Yes

Compelling

Figure 1: The methodology for conducting an ICP Analysis.

Developing your Ideal Customer Proﬁle (ICP) is the ﬁrst step in creating
an Account-Based Strategy. By narrowing in on the traits that deﬁne
your best customers, you will then be able to ﬁnd and engage with
those accounts where you are most likely to repeat success in the
future. By following the steps in this blueprint, you will be able to create
a clearly deﬁned and prioritized target account list of accounts most
likely to be your next best customers.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

TIP: Deﬁning an ideal
customer proﬁle should not
happen in a vacuum.
Creating a committee that
includes stakeholders from
all Go-to-Market teams will
help align your organization
around a common ICP and
build trust in the output of
this process, which is a
target account list.

1

STEP 1.1
Diagnose Your Customers using SPICED
The ﬁrst step in developing an ICP is to deﬁne the customers you
want more of. To uncover these key insights and model out your
ICP, start with an overview of your ideal customers, using SPICED.
We look at the Situation, Pain, Impact, Critical Event, and Decision
Criteria that your customers have in common to help target new
accounts.
SPICED, Deﬁned

S

Situation
Facts, circumstances, and background details about your ideal account types

P

Pain
The challenges that your customers experience

I

Impact
How you impact your customer’s business

CE

Critical Event
An event/deadline that drives customers to make a decision by a certain time

D

Decision
The process, committee, and criteria involved in purchasing a solution

STEP 1.2
Quantitative Analysis
At its heart, ICP development means looking for patterns in your
customer data and uncovering what your best customers have in
common. To use a data-driven approach to your ICP development,
start by looking at the company characteristics that best predict a
successful sales process in an account, and that you often ﬁnd in
your high-value customers.
To ﬁnd the best customers, start analyzing your customer base for
ﬁrmographic traits such as industry, customer revenue, employee
size, and growth rate. We ﬁnd that cross-referencing these data

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

2

points with lifetime revenue can help uncover where your
organization has delivered the most impact over time. Layering
other data sets, such as retention data, product usage, and
technographic data, can be very helpful in analyzing the traits that
these customers have in common.
Real Life Example
A talent solution company, which staffed full-time and contract talent for large enterprises, had
many customers in the manufacturing industry. Initially, manufacturing looked to be within
their ICP. However, a closer look at total revenue per customer and interviews with sellers
revealed that most low-skilled manufacturing companies would not yield the margins necessary
to sustain their business. We concluded that their ICP included only high-skilled manufacturing
companies, such as pharmaceuticals and technology. This ﬁnding enabled this company to focus
their resources and customer acquisition costs on more proﬁtable target accounts.

STEP 1.3
Qualitative Analysis
The customers that you have had success with in the past may not
be exactly the same as the ones you want to close in the future.
Beyond quantitative data sets, you will want to look at other factors
when determining your ICP. Some important factors to consider
include:
● Upcoming product releases that may address new market
segments
● Current economic market conditions
● Upcoming investment into new markets and verticals
Consider conducting interviews with experienced GTM team
members on your team; these conversations will often give you
valuable qualitative insights into your customer base that may not
show up in the data.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

3

During these interviews, do a “deep dive” on speciﬁc customers
within each segment to understand the nuances of why your
organization does well within that segment. Walk through the
SPICED criteria for 5-10 customers with the person who sold or
manages each customer, in order to uncover these insights.
Below are some example questions for your interviews:
1. How did [customer] ﬁnd our solution/how did we ﬁnd them?
2. Who were the stakeholders involved in the deal (or in the
ongoing relationship with us)?
3. What pain points were they experiencing when they found our
solution?
4. What impact does our product or service have on the
stakeholders in their organization?
5. If they had not purchased our solution, what would the impact
have been on the stakeholders or their organization?

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

4

STEP 1.4
Use Data & Insights to Uncover Your ICP
Using quantitative and qualitative analysis, patterns will start to
emerge, and your ideal customer proﬁle will start to become clear.

ACCOUNTS

ACCOUNTS

ACCOUNTS

INDUSTRY

Marketing Agencies

High Tech

Insurance

LOCATION

North America

EMEA

North America

EMPLOYEES

250-500

250-500

1000-2500

REVENUE

$50M to $100M

$50M to $100M

$100M +

DISTRIBUTED
OFFICES

Yes

No

No

80%

40%

45%

CONVERSION
RATE

CONVERSION
RATE

CONVERSION
RATE

Figure 2: Example of the common factors in three different segments of an ICP.

Real Life Example
A SaaS project management platform company was struggling to scale their GTM team after
initial successful growth. Their initial quantitative data analysis revealed some interesting
insights into the location, employee size and industries they performed well in. But the real key
attributes emerged in the qualitative review, where the team revealed how critical the project
management software was for distributed ofﬁce environments. Given this insight, they revisited
the quantitative analysis, which showed that accounts with distributed ofﬁce environments
converted at much higher rates and had longer customer lifetime value (LTV) compared to those
without a distributed ofﬁce environment.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

5

STEP 1.5
Document Your ICP & Top Segments
Take everything that you learned from your quantitative and
qualitative analysis, and distill it down into concise and consumable
proﬁles. Clearly deﬁning and documenting the proﬁle of customers
with similar situations, pain, and impacts will help formalize your
ﬁndings.
This should result in two distinct strategic documents:
● A summary of your Ideal Customer Proﬁle including the
attributes most common among your customers. Include the
common factors such as industry, company size, revenue range,
and geographic locations. These should also include key
attributes that are unique to your product or service offering,
such as a key technology, a compliance requirement, or other
unique business insight.

TIP: Once you align on and
document your ICP and key
segmentation, be sure to
create a roadmap for
operationalizing it in your
organization. Typical next
steps are creating a target
account list as the
foundation of your account
based strategy, using your
ICP for onboarding of your
GTM team so they are
aligned around the same
audience targets, and
prioritizing content creation
to these account types.

● Account Segment Proﬁles - This is a summary of 3-5 top
segments of customers within your ICP that have unique and
differentiated pain points. This will help you make the ICP
actionable for your GTM teams, while also providing a proﬁle
around which to align content, discovery, and customer stories.
Circulate these proﬁles with your stakeholder committee and
iterate on their edits and feedback. Once these proﬁles are
approved by your GTM stakeholder committee, they are ready to be
leveraged to develop and operationalize.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

6

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FROM

Videos available on
the WbD YouTube Channel

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

Additional open source
templates can be accessed at
www.thescienceofrevenue.com

7

