RESEARCH BRIEF

AI-ASSISTED MARKETING:
MESSAGING & CONTENT
By Jim Hopkins, Revenue Architect at Winning by Design

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

AI-Assisted Marketing: Messaging & Content
By Jim Hopkins, Revenue Architect at Winning by Design

Research conducted Q2 2025

Research Abstract
This research dives into the current and future state of AI-assisted marketing, with a
speciﬁc focus on messaging and content development. We outline AI’s capabilities
with regard to content development, why that matters in the context of growth, how
to implement AI into your marketing approach, and what vendors to consider as
partners in this journey.
For those looking to implement these approaches, the full version includes a
feature-level vendor comparison and a ready-to-use RFP template, available to Winning
by Design Advisory Access subscribers.

CEO Take
The pipeline creation playbook most marketing teams have been deploying since
the 2010s no longer works. It has become stale, ineffective, and too expensive to
sustain. We see this in cost-per-lead and cost-per-ARR-dollar ﬁgures that have been
consistently climbing since 2022.
AI can reduce the cost and time required to execute existing programs. But the real
promise is increasing reach and volume via new, AI-led initiatives. We’ve seen
examples of orchestrated and automated implementations that conﬁrm the
potential for AI to completely revolutionize the marketing and pipegen playbook,
turbo-boosting growth to new levels.
With the growth-at-all-cost era decidedly over, and marketing historically being one
of the largest budgets in GTM, companies that don’t take advantage of AI in
marketing will continue to spend more heavily and grow more slowly than their
competition. And as AI-assisted marketing solutions get closer to the promise of
true marketing automation - delivering the right message, at the right time, on the
right channel, to the right person - companies who haven’t built the initial processes
and infrastructure will be left too far behind to recover.

May 1, 2025

1

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

Strategic Insights
Given marketing’s range of responsibilities, it’s wise to focus initial AI investments on
speciﬁc tasks or programs that provide the most tangible and highest-priority impact
for the business - awareness and pipeline. In general terms, marketing teams focus
awareness and pipeline efforts in three areas:
1. Paid channels - advertising, events, sponsorships, etc.
2. Owned channels - website, organic social, email, etc.
3. Earned channels - public relations, search (SEO), analysts, review sites, peer
communities, etc.
The foundational element across all three channels is messaging and content. AI
Marketing platforms have clearly noted the importance of messaging and content
and made it a priority for their initial offerings. Accordingly, this brief is focused on the
use of AI to assist marketing teams in creating and delivering messaging and content
across channels.
Messaging and content includes the work done by product marketers, brand
managers, communications teams, and content marketers to translate company
values, vision, and strategy into formats that draw attention from ideal customers
(ICPs, or ideal customer proﬁles). Effective messaging and content helps marketing,
and the rest of the GTM team, signal to ICPs that:
1. The company understands the pains they’re dealing with, and
2. The company has solutions that can help them solve their pains and achieve the
impact they seek.
Traditionally, messaging and content work would require teams to invest time and
resources in a process similar to the one outlined in Figure 1 below.

May 1, 2025

2

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

MESSAGING & CONTENT PROCESS

Inputs

Writing/Creating

Activation

MARKETING TEAM

Product Marketer (PMM), Content
Marketer, Comms/PR, Ops

Writer, PMM, Content Marketer,
Comms/PR, Subject Matter Expert

Marketing/Program Lead

EXTERNAL

Agencies, Data Sources, Vendors

Agency, Freelancers

Technologies, Channels

PLAYERS

Days-to-Weeks

One-off (App) or Programmatic
(API)

AI TOOLS

Integrations

Minutes
Figure 1. Legacy messaging & content development processes take days-to-weeks. AI promises to
reduce portions of that process to minutes.

Most AI marketing solutions available today have started by focusing on the
“Writing/Creating” step of this process. AI ﬁlls the role that a writer, freelancer, or
agency would normally play in this step. AI produces a draft piece of messaging and
content in a matter of seconds vs. the days or weeks it might take for humans to do
similar work. Vendors in this space have developed apps, workﬂows, or wizards that
make it easier to prompt AI for speciﬁc writing tasks by format - blog, whitepaper,
social post, product description, etc.

AI is able to produce a draft piece of
messaging and content in a matter of
seconds vs. days or weeks.

May 1, 2025

3

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

Judging the quality of messaging and content can be subjective. Most agree though,
that inputs and instructions play a signiﬁcant role in output quality - both with
humans and AI. For this reason, AI marketing platforms include capabilities to
establish these inputs and instructions up front, speeding up the creative process,
and simultaneously ensuring quality:
● Brand voice parameters–including style, format and key words or phrases
● Persona templates–format and process for developing ICP and persona
descriptions that serve as input to messaging creation
● Research process–standard process for independently conducting research on
the target market for incorporation into content
● Content templates–standard approaches to creating various asset types,
including internal documents (e.g. conversation cards, positioning documents,
creative briefs) and externally facing assets (e.g. blog posts, customer stories,
product descriptions)
In all of this there are three levels of execution where marketing teams could take AI
messaging and content solutions:
1. Assistive: Making individual contributors - PMMs, Content Marketers, et al - more
productive by taking their inputs and acting as the writer, producing the content
and messaging that they can then reﬁne and activate on speciﬁc channels for
individual programs. This level is estimated to deliver 3-5x more productivity
(more content, programs → pipeline), while reducing costs.
2. Orchestrated: Supercharging entire programs or channels by creating an
integrated ﬂow that allows for messaging and content production at scale.One
common use case is an email/nurture program that takes inputs from large
datasets, uses them to produce personalized and relevant messages, and
delivers them to target audiences. Another is analyzing and recommending an
SEO strategy, setting up an ongoing content creation schedule, then
writing/producing content that gets prepped and published via integration. This
type of use case gets us to more exponential gains, with reports showing 5-10x
productivity/pipeline, and even more reduction in costs.

May 1, 2025

4

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

3. Autonomous (Real Marketing Automation): AI solutions take on more of the
complete process of messaging and content, including more tools for developing
inputs, and then more automatically activating/delivering it. This is the fulﬁllment of
the visions of “Marketing Automation” from many years ago. Unlike traditional tools
limited to lead databases and email campaigns, AI-powered marketing automation
will organize signals, analyze them, and autonomously decide which messages to
send, when, and through which channels — all with minimal human intervention. This
use case is still in vision/roadmap status, but it holds the promise of transformation
that delivers logarithmic productivity and savings.
Most vendors analyzed for this research offer apps/platforms, and even free trials, that
deliver “Assistive” beneﬁts. These apps allow marketers to use a workﬂow to provide
inputs and prompt the AI to write something, usually focused on a speciﬁed format or
channel. While several vendors told stories of customers taking advantage of
“orchestrated” beneﬁts, this still requires a non-trivial amount of human-in-the-loop
setup, conﬁguration, and integration with other solutions. In most cases, the AI solution
is being used purely as the “writing” mechanism in the ﬂow, with inputs coming from a
data source, system, or the like, and activation happening via integration with an email
platform, marketing automation tool, or website/content management system.
Industry averages for marketing spend put content marketing at around 25% of the total
budget, with writing or agency fees ranging from $5-50k/month depending on size and
volume. With an AI solution in the hands of a core group of strategic marketers, we
estimate immediate cost savings of 90-95%. When calculating time savings, we should
factor in not only creation time, but also waiting time. With quicker turnarounds, for
content creation and review, our research indicates that AI-assisted programs could
easily double the number of assets produced and/or campaigns run (2x). Other research
and customer stories highlight improvements in quality of engagement and conversion
rates through the increased ability to be more targeted and personalized with messaging
and content at scale, meaning more pipeline at a lower cost. Taking this into
consideration, we estimate conversion rates can improve at an average of 40% when
leveraging more targeted and personalized AI-assisted messaging and content.

May 1, 2025

5

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

As AI-assisted marketing matures, other areas of the marketing function could be
impacted. While this report focuses on one facet of marketing – messaging & content several vendors offer solutions that dabble in other marketing tasks. AI has the
potential to support more marketing use cases including:
● Strategy - prioritization, targeting, goal setting, budgeting and performance
measurement
● Demand Creation - campaign planning, media planning, creative optimization,
automated interactions/engagement
● Demand Capture - form replacement, lead database management, scoring, routing
● Enablement - training, certiﬁcation, feedback, voice-of-customer,
resource/document management
Some B2B marketing teams may be responsible for the prospecting function, and so
may be involved in employing AI agents for inbound and outbound lead development
(see AI SDR Agents Research here »). This could likely involve transitioning demand
capture mechanisms, setting up the digital presence, and adjusting lead ﬂow to support
the use of AI agents. The future could see more agentic presence on digital channels
owned by Marketing - a digital concierge replacing a more traditional “brochure” website
or content repository. For now, Marketing’s AI maturity is at stage 2 (see ﬁgure above),
mostly replacing the roles that might currently be done by agencies, consultants, and
freelancers.

Practical Insights: Implementation
Identifying Opportunities
Within an initial focus on the marketing sub-discipline of messaging & content, there
are a variety of possibilities for testing and implementing AI. Start by working with your
messaging & content leaders to assess the current state of programs and assets. Are
there gaps - areas where we have outdated or missing messaging, or channels/formats
where we’re lacking content? Are we underperforming in some area - a particular
channel with low engagement, an ICP that’s not converting well, etc.?

May 1, 2025

6

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

Are there desired methods or levels of personalization the team has not been able to try
because of limitations in bandwidth or budget? Test one or more of the AI solutions’
content analysis/recommendation features to see if it can adequately identify
opportunities based on competitors, keywords, traﬃc patterns, SEO, style, etc. You may
even do some internal research, surveying or interviewing team members to ﬁnd out if
there are messaging and content gaps or opportunities you haven’t seen.
Below are several examples of where AI could make an impact for speciﬁc messaging
and content jobs-to-be-done:

Category

Before AI

After AI

Foundational
Messaging
(One-Off)

Manual brand workshops,
stakeholder interviews, iterative
reviews to deﬁne positioning,
tone, voice

AI-assisted synthesis of stakeholder
input, instant tone/voice modeling,
dynamic brand guide generation

Limited by expertise, bandwidth unable to cover all segments, ICPs.

Product
Messaging &
Documentation

Demand Gen
Content

Campaign
Creative

May 1, 2025

Produce several options and iterate
quickly.
Cover all segments thoroughly.

PMs or marketers write copy
with SME reviews, often delayed
or incomplete.

AI trained on product materials
generates clear messaging and
user-facing docs with SME prompts.

Manual tracking and organizing to
update with new releases,
launches, etc.

Fit into tight product launch
timelines.

Content strategists and writers
draft blogs, eBooks, and webinars
manually, often limited by
bandwidth, budget, and timelines.

Quick turnaround of ideas, outlines,
and drafts at signiﬁcantly lower
cost.

Brainstorming sessions, creative
briefs to agencies, lengthy review
cycles for copy and creative
concepts.

AI suggests campaign themes,
headlines, visuals, and variations in
minutes, enabling faster testing.

Cover more product areas with
fewer resources.

Any number of versions by segment,
industry, persona, region, etc.

No agency necessary.

7

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

Category

Before AI

After AI

SEO & Website
Content

Keyword research, slow drafting
of optimized content, manual
A/B testing for performance.

AI auto-generates SEO content from
key terms and audience intent; tests
variations and adapts dynamically.

Maintain/keep up with production
calendar to see best results.

Schedule ahead of time and spend
time on reﬁnement/strategy.

Long cycles for drafting, approval,
testing; performance-driven by
experience.

AI crafts copy for nurture,
promotions, and triggers using
customer behavior patterns and
performance data

Email
Programs

Limited by bandwidth to large
segments and blasts,
token-based customization.

Can deliver 1:1 personalization at
scale and improve
engagement/response (limited only
by audiences/targets)

Organic
Social

Content calendars created
manually; limited team capacity
for timely or reactive posts.

AI schedules and writes social
content - with multiple variations across platforms, adjusting tone per
audience.

PR & Thought
Leadership

Execs or ghostwriters spend hours
crafting op-eds or interviews,
making it hard to scale.

AI helps generate outlines and drafts
in authentic voice from bullet points
or past writing.

Fire-drills to quickly draft and
reﬁne content on tight timelines.

Organize and schedule content in
well in advance.

Outreach
Messaging

SDR teams or marketers manually
write scripts and follow-ups, with
limited A/B testing cycles.

AI tailors outreach for segments or
individuals based on ﬁrmographic
and behavioral data; can auto-test
variants.

Sales /
Enablement
Content

Reps rely on slide decks,
one-pagers created by marketing
with long update cycles.

AI dynamically generates updated,
segment or persona-speciﬁc
collateral and resources based on
needs and/or data inputs.

Table 1. Messaging and content jobs-to-be-done before and after AI

Once you identify an opportunity, you can begin to plan how to apply an AI
solution to address it.

May 1, 2025

8

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

People
Product Marketing and/or Content Marketing are often the key roles responsible for
messaging and content, with some involvement of Brand/Communications/PR.
Leaders of these teams should be tasked with piloting AI solutions to aid their work,
and collaborate with Marketing Leadership, Operations, and other peers to set up more
orchestrated or automated workﬂows, measure performance, and explore more
transformational use cases.
For “Assistive” use cases, AI solutions will serve as aides or copilots. Your team will
need to gather and/or connect inputs in the role of strategist, editor, or creative director.
AI will be able to help synthesize and organize those inputs and offer recommendations
or guidance, then ﬁll the role of writer and creator. In this scenario, solutions like those
reviewed for this research offer workﬂows or apps that are speciﬁc to a content format
or channel, suggesting the info the user might provide as inputs to get an ideal result.
If you’ve invested in writing capabilities as part of your team, those roles can be shifted
into more editor/creative director roles. AI will enable team members with messaging
and content skills to think more strategically and focus on higher value tasks, while
increasing productivity.
In “orchestrated” use cases, AI solutions will be used as a link in the chain, likely
connected to other systems and tools to serve a complete program. In this scenario,
you’ll likely need a small group of marketing team members that includes Ops,
PMM/Content, and Demand Generation to help with setup and ongoing monitoring and
optimization of the program.
As AI solutions for marketers proliferate, we see teams becoming more productive and
therefore leaner. Marketers will no longer need to have advanced writing skills, or a
portfolio. The marketer who is adept at conducting and orchestrating strategic
programs will be able to build and execute the programs herself, without an army of
specialists to wrangle. This may mean that there will be fewer opportunities for the
marketing specialist with skills that overlap with AI capabilities. Those who embrace
these solutions, and their potential for transformation vs. kung-fu gripping the old
playbooks, will be better equipped to thrive in an AI-powered future.

May 1, 2025

9

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

Process
Using AI as a writer/creator in the messaging and content use cases listed above is the ﬁrst
and most obvious deployment. Considering the full messaging and content development
process (ﬁgure 1), there may be additional offerings and strengths the AI solutions has,
including:
● Helping gather, parse through and summarize inputs like large amounts of data,
research, or other content to inform messaging and content — especially in an
orchestrated scenario
● Creating and reﬁning briefs, instructions, outlines, or prompts for creating the content sometimes for use with other AI or creative solutions
● Reviewing and reﬁning for style adherence, with editing suggestions
● Preparing content for publishing, adding production-ready elements, or leveraging
integrations or workﬂows for “going live”
Some solutions may be able to self-optimize or learn, requiring the most human involvement
in initial setup and conﬁguration then reducing over time. Getting to the Goldilocks point
where you can trust the AI to produce messaging and content that is “just right” will take
testing, reﬁnement, and hands-on editing. Successful teams use a pilot project or test
campaign with heavy human oversight to gauge the following for their selected solution:
● How much effort of input does the solution require - upfront for set up, and ongoing?
● Is the output quality satisfactory? Is it able to improve with additional direction? How
much human review is required to get the outputs to an approved state?
Compare the results of the test campaign to your legacy, non-AI messaging and content
process. A positive signal would be that you are able to achieve a comparable output
(measured in engagement or conversions) for a similar or lower level of human effort, while
reducing costs and time in the writing/creation steps. The assumption then, is that
optimizations and scale will offer even better eﬃciencies and cost savings. A test could look
something like below, taking the example of a single blog post:

May 1, 2025

10

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

Metric

Legacy/Non-AI

AI Solution X

Content Creation Time

4 hours (2 days wait/edit)

30 minutes

Engagement

100 views/mo

100 views/mo

Conversions

5

10

Marketing time per converted
lead

48 min (plus wait time)

3 min
→ 93% savings

Table 2. Sample calculation comparing legacy content creation methods to an AI solution

Systems
It’s important to design pilot programs and evaluate solutions based on the answers to
some of the following questions about solution capabilities and features:
Foundation/Setup:
● How do we incorporate or develop guardrails around our brand guidelines (voice, tone,
style, etc.), strategy, and goals?
● What inputs are required for generating messaging and content and how are they
collected - is it a guided wizard/ﬂow, templates for prompts, free form/text prompts, or
some other mechanism?
● What assessment, audit, analysis, or recommendation tools are available?
● Which LLMs (Large Language Models) does the solution leverage? What are the
strengths and weaknesses of the model(s)?
● How will you check, measure, and ensure quality? What editing, approval, and
collaboration capabilities will we need?
● What orchestration capabilities does the solution have - automated content production?
● What can be done via integration (inputs and outputs)?
● How much human involvement will be required to publish or put content into
production?

May 1, 2025

11

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

Formats
Are the messaging and content formats you need covered?
❏ Product Messaging

❏ Long Form Content (eBook, Whitepaper,
Thought Leadership, etc.)

❏ Presentations & Slides
❏ Advertising Concepts

❏ Press Releases

❏ Advertising Copy

❏ Email (one-off/blast)

❏ Advertising Creative

❏ Email Programs/Sequences

(Text vs. Image vs. Video)
❏ Social Media Posts

❏ Multi-Channel Sequences (lead dev/prospecting)
❏ Website/Landing Pages
(concept vs. copy vs. design)

❏ SEO Content (keyword-based)
❏ Blog Posts (types: listicle, how-to,
problem-solution…)

❏ Video Concepts/Scripts
❏ Video Production/Clips
❏ Other?

Vendor Selection
● What resources would be available to you as a customer?
● Do roadmap capabilities match the vision for your marketing strategy?
● Where in the roadmap are they adding orchestrated/automated content
program capabilities?
● Is the roadmap pointed toward AI-marketing automation - more
autonomous marketing campaigns?
● What have other peers or similar customers been able to achieve that
would be impactful to your business too?

May 1, 2025

12

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

Final Word: The AI Marketing Revolution Is No Longer Optional
The hype around AI is intense, but marketing teams cannot wait until 2026, when it will
be too late, with competitors on the next wave of evolution. Marketers who take
advantage of AI to enhance messaging and content development are experiencing
unprecedented eﬃciencies—reducing production timelines from weeks to hours while
simultaneously seeing improved quality, unprecedented levels of personalization, and
new audience reach. As marketing budgets face increasing scrutiny in a
post-growth-at-all-cost era, the productivity gains and cost savings associated with AI
implementation will soon shift from advantage to necessity. Using the rapidly maturing
solutions in messaging and content as a center of gravity, teams that learn and evolve
with these technologies and partner with vendors will be able to more effectively
expand to other typical marketing uses, then evolved playbooks, and on to currently
unimagined methods.

Want to make this happen?
Book Time with an Advisor

May 1, 2025

13

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
The following supplementary materials are available in the full version
of this report, available to subscribers in the reference library. For more
information on subscribing, see winningbydesign.com/access-pass.

01 Vendor Descriptions
02 Vendor Comparison
03 RFP Template
04 Content for Multiple Touches

May 1, 2025

14

AI-Assisted Marketing

Winning by Design Proprietary

READ OUR OTHER AI AGENT RESEARCH REPORTS

AI AGENTS: RESEARCH ACROSS THE BOWTIE

Like what you read?
Send to a Colleague

May 1, 2025

15

