BLUEPRINT.

Target Account List Creation
How to unify your organization around a target account list

Once you have identiﬁed your Ideal Customer Proﬁle, you can
leverage it to create and operationalize your target account list.
Selecting the right target accounts is key to the success of your
account-based strategy (ABS). Your target account list is the list of
accounts that are most likely to become your next best customers, and
includes the accounts you will engage using your account-based programs.
Developing a target account list is an iterative process that will likely
evolve over time. As you learn more about your ABS strategy and ideal
customer proﬁle (ICP), you will likely reﬁne and expand your list.
Building trust in this list across your entire GTM team — including Sales,
Marketing, and Customer Success — will be critical to getting these
accounts across the line. Marketing will focus their budget and program
resources on these accounts, SDRs will focus their time on prospecting
these accounts, and the Sales team will cultivate relationships within these
accounts. Transparency and communication are key, so the ﬁrst
step is to agree on which approach you will take to build your target
account list.

Approaches to developing a target account list
1

Named Account List
For an account based pilot, using the named account list that your
account executives (AEs) are already leveraging can be a good
starting point. A seasoned rep who knows the company’s ideal
customer proﬁle (ICP) or the right “ﬁt” for your organization can
help you build the foundation for your list.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

1

2

Fit Model
Accounts that are a “ﬁt” have the same traits and characteristics as
your current customer base. In this data-driven approach, you would
model your list using the attributes of your current successful
customers; other companies that have those “ﬁt” criteria would make
it onto the list. These criteria might include factors such as company
size, industry, geography, or number of locations, as well as others
that are unique to your business, such as key technologies, budget
size, or department size. Examining these factors and ﬁnding “like”
accounts will help you zero in on those are that are similar to your
existing best customers.

3

Adding In-Market Signals
An ideal account is not only one that is a good ﬁt for your solution; it
should also be in the market for your solution too. Finding accounts
that ﬁt your ICP, and are experiencing the pain points you solve for,
can be key to turning your target account list into active pipeline.
Use intent-based data from vendors such as Demandbase and
6Sense, along with customer interaction data from your CRM or
marketing automation system, to identify accounts that may be
actively looking for solutions like yours.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

2

ICP attributes and
Top Segments
ACCOUNT LIST
STEP...1
ANALYSIS

Run attributes
through data source
to uncover your
target accounts
STEP...2
Tiering of accounts

QUALIFIED
ACCOUNTS
STEP...3

CUSTOMERS

T1

T2

T3

S ituation

Yes

Yes

Yes

P ain

Yes

Yes

I mpact Potential

Likely

C ritical E vent

Yes

Validate accounts
with key GTM
Stakeholders

TIERED TARGET
ACCOUNT LIST

Compelling

Take the following steps to operationalize a target
account list across your organization:
STEP 1.1
Run attributes through your data source to uncover your
target accounts
Once you have a clearly deﬁned and documented ICP, run these
attributes through your data source to ﬁnd more accounts with the
same proﬁle. Enriching your database with these accounts will ensure
that you have one source of truth, and that your sales and marketing
teams are engaging with the right accounts.

TIP: Leveraging data
sources such as ZoomInfo,
InsideView, Dun &
Bradstreet, and Clearbit will
provide the necessary data
for this process. For a more
advanced selection, you can
also leverage predictive data
vendors such as 6Sense,
Demandbase, or LeadSpace,
for both ﬁt and intent data.
Many of these technologies
also allow for an account
“score”, so you can easily
prioritize accounts within
your list.

You may need to use several data sources to enrich your database
with the level of detail that you need. The data sources that you
choose will be highly speciﬁc to your ICP.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

3

STEP 1.2
Tier your accounts
Within your target account list, not every account will have the
same level of priority or receive the same treatment from your
organization. Tiering helps deﬁne how different accounts are treated
across the bowtie, and helps identify which teams are tasked with
engaging accounts at what time.
To determine which tier to assign to each account, create a ﬁt score
based on your modeled customer data. A ﬁt score is a score given to
an account to represent the likelihood of becoming a customer, as
well as the opportunity size of the account. Depending on how you
deﬁne your ICP, some data providers may be able to provide a ﬁt
score based on your modeled customer data, or you can create your
own. Assigning a ﬁt score to each account in your list will help you
prioritize accounts and tier them out.
Below are some sample criteria you can use to determine your ﬁt
score:
● Market
● Region
● Pain
● Impact
● Critical Event
● Role
● Size
● Environment
● Opportunity Size
A tiered account structure allows you to assign a different level of
resource allocation for your engagement strategy. With this, your Tier
1 accounts are the highest priority and receive the most focus, while
Tier 3 accounts still receive broad air cover from your Marketing
team. Clearly deﬁned tiers help deﬁne the “swim lanes” for which
teams will be engaging with which accounts over time.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

4

Real Life Example
One of our customers, an enterprise video solution, used a tiered target account list
strategy to deﬁne how each account was treated throughout the sales cycle. Tier 1
accounts were enterprise accounts engaged with 1-to-1 strategic account programs
from Account Executives, Tier 2 accounts were pursued with outbound plays from
Sales Development Reps, and Tier 3 accounts were engaged with more programmatic
campaigns such as webinars and account-based advertising. This ensured that the
accounts that had the largest revenue opportunity and the best ﬁt were allocated the
most resources.

STEP 1.3
Validate accounts with GTM stakeholders
When your target account list is ready, the next step is to get buy-in
and ensure that it is adopted throughout your GTM team. This can be
accomplished by creating cross-functional ownership across teams.
Establish the roles of each stakeholder involved in the account
selection process. These stakeholders will help reﬁne the criteria for

TIP: Include a series of
reviews, feedback loops, and
approval points with your
key stakeholders throughout
each step. Align on target
dates to ensure a list is
operationalized prior to
rolling out a full
account-based program.

inclusion on the list, and will start to buy into the process and the
model of how the list has been built.
Position

Role

Driver

GTM strategy leader (Marketing and/or Sales Operations leader): Responsible for
driving the project and providing strategy and insights; these roles are key to data
insights and account criteria selection

Approvers

CMO/CRO/CEO: Responsible for reviewing and approving the initial target
account list and quarterly account changes

Contributor

AEs: Involved in manually reviewing the target accounts in their territories

Inﬂuencers

Marketing, Product SDRs, and Sales Management: Will help to maintain the list
going forward and identify discrepancies

Once you have aligned, approved, and tiered out your target account
list with your GTM stakeholders, the list is ready to be
operationalized in your systems.
Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

5

STEP 1.4
Operationalize Across Your Systems
In order to target, engage, and report on your target accounts, be
sure that they are easily accessible in your CRM and marketing
automation platform, as well as any other orchestration systems
you’re using.
Make sure that each account indicates whether or not they are a
target account on the actual account record in your CRM. This way,
your target account lists, contacts, and reporting are easily
streamlined and measurable.

TARGET ACCOUNT TIER 01

01
02

TARGET ACCOUNT TIER 02

TARGET ACCOUNT TIER 03

03
STEP 1.5
Review the Target Account List on a Quarterly Basis
You should maintain your target account list each quarter, but when
you’re ﬁrst getting started, be sure to give your accounts a chance to
gain traction before changing course. A best practice is to review
your target accounts quarterly, and refresh around 20% of your list
each time. If the list turns over more than that, then it will be difﬁcult
to track the performance of your success against non-target
accounts.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

6

Be sure to continually optimize for things such as:
● AE account selection: Allow AEs to tag accounts they wish to
exclude and/or include in the next quarterly target account
review process based on clearly outlined criteria.
● Market changes: Changes in market dynamics, the competitive
landscape, or a new feature in your own product may open up a
greater total addressable market.
● Performance: If certain segments or customer attributes are
converting at a substantially higher rate, ensure that you evolve
your list so that it incorporates those insights and bubbles up the
accounts that are most likely to convert.
● Engagement and Intent: If certain accounts have shown high
levels of buying signals, you may want to prioritize these
accounts in your tiering process.

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

TIP: Don’t over-architect
your target account selection
with too much complexity.
Teams often get stuck here.
While having a data-driven
list and solid strategy for
your selected accounts is
important, decision makers
should keep in mind an
80/20 rule when it comes to
approving the account list.
Aligning on a data-driven
account list is always better
than each team pursuing
their own set of accounts in
silos.

7

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES FROM

Videos available on
the WbD YouTube Channel

Proprietary And Conﬁdential | Winning By Design™

Additional open source
templates can be accessed at
www.thescienceofrevenue.com

8

